<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en-gb" lang="en-gb">
<head>
    <meta charset="utf-8"/>
 
    <title>Introduction</title>

    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/blitz_abelab.css"/>

  </head>
  <body epub:type="bodymatter">
    <section id="introduction" class="level1" role="doc-introduction">
     
      <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page5" aria-label="5">
      </span>
      <h1>Introduction</h1>
      <p>This white paper is a public deliverable of the <strong>Accessible Backlist Ebooks Laboratory (ABE Lab)</strong>, a Creative Europe funded project, and can be freely downloaded from the <em>Deliverables</em> section on the official ABE Lab website.</p>
      <p>In recent years, the topic of digital accessibility has become increasingly important, also in the light of the imminent entry into force of the Directive 2019/882 on accessibility requirements for products and services, usually referred to as <em>European Accessibility Act</em> (EAA).</p>
      <p>Ebooks are among the services to which the Directive applies. Some publishers have already started to produce and distribute <em>born accessible ebooks</em> to be in line with the EAA when it comes into force in June 2025. But how to manage ebooks that have been produced and published in previous years, the so-called <em>backlist</em>?</p>
      <p>This is where all those tools, software, platforms, cloud solutions, APIs and other applications that can be used to transform an inaccessible ebook into an accessible version come into play, correcting accessibility issues to obtain a digital book that meets the requirements defined by European legislation and international accessibility guidelines. Sometimes, these solutions are marketed as and used in the context of conversion services. These technological products can differ greatly in terms of technology used, functions available, target audience and methods of integration within the remediation workflows of publishers and publishing industry players. Some are developed with the aim of outputting a file that is already fully accessible and compliant with international accessibility requirements, while others may be specialised in solving specific accessibility problems. The latter tools can then be integrated into workflows to support a specific remediation activity within the process of converting the ebook into an accessible version.</p>
      <p>In this white paper, we use the term <em>remediation tool</em> as an umbrella term that includes technological and IT products of different types. Remediation and conversion <em>services</em>, however, are outside the scope of the project. With remediation and conversion services we refer to the services offered by commercial companies or realities specialised in producing accessible versions, where the remediation activity is carried out by a third party on behalf of a client.</p>
      <p>This document aims to provide high-level guidelines that can be used by producers and developers of remediation tools to design, develop or improve their own tools, highlighting the requirements these tools should include to be effective and to support the human operators by making the process as simple, intuitive and fluid as possible - depending also on the competence of the target users.</p>
    </section>
</body>
</html>