<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en-gb" lang="en-gb">

<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8" />

  <title>Appendix</title>

  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/blitz_abelab.css" />
</head>

<body epub:type="backmatter">
  <section id="appendix" class="level1" role="doc-appendix">
    <p>
      <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page27" aria-label="27"></span>
    </p>
    <h1 >Appendix</h1>
    <p>The two following subsections establish industry events and key points to collect to establish a good knowledge
      of the collections. All of them will probably not apply to each collection; they are to be assessed and selected
      based on the country, the publishing house, and the ebook collection.</p>
    <section id="industry-facts-to-know" class="level2" >
      <h2 >Industry facts to know</h2>
      <p>There are some dates that have affected the ebook production workflow widely. They are good to know and may
        help identify, understand and classify ebooks. However, they did not affect all files, and certainly not
        simultaneously.</p>
      <p>EPUBCheck is a validation tool for EPUB files, and it has undergone several versions since its inception. Here
        are the main EPUBCheck versions<a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1" epub:type="noteref"
          role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a> and their corresponding EPUB specifications:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <p>EPUBCheck1.x: this version was released around the time of the EPUB 2.0.1 specification, published in 2010.
            EPUB 2.0.1 was an update to the original EPUB 2.0 specification, released in 2007;</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>EPUBCheck3.x: this version corresponds to the EPUB 3.0 specification, which was published in 2014.
            EPUBCheck 3.0.1 was released in 2015, and EPUBCheck 3.2.1 was released in 2021. These versions of EPUBCheck
            are used to validate EPUB 3.0 and later files;</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>EPUBCheck 4.x: this version corresponds to the EPUB 3.2 specification, which was published in 2017.
            EPUBCheck 4.0.0 was released in 2018, and EPUBCheck 4.2.1 was released in 2021. These versions of EPUBCheck
            are used to validate EPUB 3.2 and later files;</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>EPUBCheck4.1.0 (November 2018) was the first release under the DAISY Consortium maintenance role. It
            notably introduces better support for the EPUB Accessibility Vocabulary, reports duplicate landmarks and not
            unique landmarks anchors and reports for CSS absolute positioning as well as font size validation;</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>EPUBCheck5.0.0 (January 2023) is the version testing EPUB 3.3 rules. It notably includes checking
            <i>epub:type</i> restrictions, considering HTML form elements as scripted content, reporting empty title
            elements in XHTML Content Documents, allow remote resources in scripted content and fonts, disallowing
            remote links in TOC, landmarks and pagelist navigation, allowing <i>epub:type</i> on all HTML elements as
            well as extend authorised ARIA roles.</p>
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>It is also important to notice that EPUBCheck includes checks from the W3C markup validator<a href="#fn2"
          class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a>.</p>
      <p>ACE 1.0 was released in January 2018. Two intermediary versions are to consider: 1.1 (April 2019), 1.2 (April
        2021). Since then, one maintenance update has been released almost every year. ACE's full changelog can be
        consulted on the ACE GitHub repository.</p>
      <p>Adobe InDesign<a href="#fn3" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref3" epub:type="noteref"
          role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a> has supported EPUB 3 export since the release of InDesign CC 2015 in June
        2015. InDesign CC 2017 introduced support for audio and video embedding, and InDesign CC 2018 introduced PDF
        Accessibility enhancements and added support for MathML. Fondazione LIA is leading a group of experts working to
        provide insights to Adobe and guide the InDesign development team on missing or incorrect InDesign export
        features for accessible EPUB. The group is the result of a common request done to Adobe by Fondazione LIA, Daisy
        Consortium, IPA (International Publishers Association) and FEP (Federation of European Publishers)<a href="#fn4"
          class="footnote-ref" id="fnref4" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>4</sup></a>.</p>
      <p>
        <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page28" aria-label="28"></span>Amazon’s Kindle Direct
        Publishing (KDP) platform has accepted EPUB files for conversion into the Kindle format (.mobi or .kpf) since
        2016. Amazon does have its own validation process to ensure that the EPUB files uploaded to KDP meet certain
        quality standards. This validation uses a custom validation tool based on the EPUB specification to check for
        potential issues and inconsistencies in the uploaded files.
      </p>
      <p>Kobo has been using EPUBCheck as a requirement for ebooks published through their platform, Kobo Writing Life,
        for several years. Although there is no specific date mentioned in their public resources, it is generally
        assumed that this requirement has been in place since the early days of Kobo Writing Life, which was launched in
        2012.</p>
      <p>Apple Books has been accepting EPUB files since the launch of the iBooks app in 2010, and it remains the
        standard file format for publishing ebooks on the platform. Apple Books does not explicitly impose EPUBCheck as
        a requirement for EPUB files. However, Apple strongly recommends using EPUBCheck to validate your EPUB files
        before submitting them for publication on Apple Books.</p>
      <p>While EPUB is an open standard for ebooks, some ebook vendors and publishers use proprietary technologies
        within EPUB files to add enhanced features or to protect their content. It's important to note that while these
        proprietary technologies can add enhanced features or protect content, they can also limit interoperability and
        compatibility between different ebook vendors and devices. As a result, it's generally recommended to use open
        standards and avoid proprietary technologies whenever possible.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="key-points-to-assess-the-knowledge-of-collections" class="level2" >
      <p>
        <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page29" aria-label="29"></span>
      </p>
      <h2 >Key points to assess the knowledge of collections</h2>
      <p>Ebooks have been produced over more than twenty years. In this timelapse, many things may have happened, from
        responsible people shifting to stakeholders' decisions and passing by distributors' and vendors' policies.</p>
      <p>To be able to identify groups of ebooks in the backlist with potentially similar remediation requirements,
        first of all, it is important to reconstruct the production history of the backlist files. The following
        elements may help separate ebooks in stacks per year of production. They are presented as an ordered list for
        easy reference, and the order reflects their importance.</p>
      <ol type="1">
        <li>
          <p>
            <i>Was there a file quality control established, what did it address and with which tools?</i> File quality
            control is usually a checklist that helps eliminate some common errors. If industry-recognized tools like
            EPUBCheck or ACE were used, it would help identify some patterns (see section <i>Industry facts to
              know</i>).
          </p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>
            <i>Was there, and since when, one or more specifications, and did it have a dedicated accessibility
              requirement?</i> The presence of contractual documents certainly gives strong indicators that can be used
            to separate collections.
          </p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>
            <i>Is there internal documentation of the choices made in production?</i> In complement or by default of the
            precedent structured documents, editorial and production choices may have affected the quality of the
            produced ebooks. This may include graphical resources policies, decisions to convert tables as images,
            addition of page markers, etc. Such documentation can be rebuilt by collecting and dating events.
          </p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>
            <i>Is there, and since when a person responsible for the digital production activities?</i> When responsible
            for digital production, people usually have a long-time view that implies minimum consistency in the choices
            made.
          </p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>If the production has been outsourced, <i>has the relationship with service providers been maintained? Are
              they still suppliers?</i></p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>If the production has been made in-house, <i>how many people have been involved, and how long did they stay
              on?</i></p>
        </li>
      </ol>
      <p>Secondly, it is necessary to assess the knowledge of the collections.</p>
      <ol type="1">
        <li>
          <p>How many titles are there in the backlist?</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>Are the digital versions available in different formats? Is there a need to maintain all formats?</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>What software was used for production?</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>Are the source files still available in a usable format?</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>What resources are included in the ebook?</p>
        </li>
      </ol>
 
    </section>
  </section>
  <section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document" epub:type="footnotes">
    <hr />
    <ol>
      <li id="fn1">
        <p>Full changelogs of epubcheck can be found at <a
            href="https://www.w3.org/publishing/epubcheck/releases/"><u>https://www.w3.org/publishing/epubcheck/releases/</u></a><a
            href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn2">
        <p>W3C markup validator change logs can be found at <a
            href="https://github.com/validator/validator/releases"><u>https://github.com/validator/validator/releases</u></a>/<a
            href="#fnref2" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn3">
        <p>InDesign changelogs are not centralised. The <i>what’s new</i> page points the last updates and has a section
          pointing to most recent previous versions: <a
            href="https://helpx.adobe.com/indesign/using/whats-new.html"><u>https://helpx.adobe.com/indesign/using/whats-new.html</u></a><a
            href="#fnref3" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn4">
        <p>Exemples and discussions can be found at <a
            href="https://github.com/ways2read/InDesignA11Y"><u>https://github.com/ways2read/InDesignA11Y</u></a><a
            href="#fnref4" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p>
      </li>
    </ol>
  </section>
</body>

</html>