<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en-gb" lang="en-gb">

<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8" />

  <title>Leveraging impacts</title>

  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/blitz_abelab.css" />
</head>

<body epub:type="bodymatter">
  <section id="leveraging-impacts" class="level1" >
    <p>
      <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page24" aria-label="24"></span>
    </p>
    <h1 >Leveraging impacts</h1>
    <p>The expected impacts of the ABE Lab project detailed in the Activities section are considered over three periods:
      short term (before 2025), medium Term (2025 – 2026) and long Term (2026 – 2030). They follows three axes:</p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <p>analysis of the composition of the ebook backlist</p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p>classification of the remediation needs of the ebooks of the backlist</p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p>assessments of the associated costs.</p>
      </li>
    </ul>
    <p>We hope that the outcomes of this project will be useful in achieving significant impacts in the publishing
      industry. However, we recognize that there are still challenges related to consolidating these impacts over the
      long term. As a result, we propose additional activities that we believe would be valuable for all stakeholders in
      the publishing chain. These activities should address the needs of a diverse ecosystem, including smaller actors,
      by providing tools and resources. However, it's important to consider the sustainability of every actor involved,
      beyond just technical solutions. This includes the work of experts on standardisation and advocacy, as well as
      efforts to raise awareness and build confidence among readers who would benefit from accessible ebooks.
      Ultimately, these activities should aim to create a sustainable and inclusive publishing ecosystem that benefits
      everyone involved.</p>
    <p>The consolidations to consider are following four axes:</p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <p>efficient decision-making at organisation and national levels, enabled by a clear picture of the state of the
          ebook backlist;</p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p>publishers level evaluation of the composition of their collections and associated remediation costs based on
          expert-established analysis methodology;</p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p>a greater number of ebooks made accessible with a high level of quality made possible by enhanced technical
          workflows and tools;</p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p>an easier process for future production and a better repartition of knowledge over the value chain thanks to
          the sum of information provided in the project communications<a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
            epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a>.</p>
      </li>
    </ul>
    <p>The next sections detail our propositions to provide ecosystem-level mechanisms and help with shaping the future
      of accessible ebooks.</p>
    <section id="consistent-data-collection-and-analysis-methodology" class="level2" >
      <h2 >Consistent data collection and analysis methodology</h2>
      <p>ABE Lab represents a very new picture, providing as good work as possible per today's state of data collection
        (more than expected at the beginning). Publishers, unions for the blind and visually impaired, and public
        services have, for the first time, a picture of the status of the European ebook backlist, but it’s a quick
        snapshot; available data will not allow for yearly comparisons in the foreseeable future and the view presented
        here might soon become obsolete.</p>
      <p>Another aspect is that the picture is clear, but the content is noisy, and clarifications could only be done by
        yearly aggregations and refining. There is a need for a longer time view to highlight and valorate the industry
        efforts and progress made.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="classification-wizard-service" class="level2" >
      <p>
        <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page25" aria-label="25"></span>
      </p>
      <h2 >Classification wizard service</h2>
      <p>ABE Lab has developed a methodology for classifying ebooks in a way that supports efficient remediation. This
        methodology can be used by more technically oriented publishers to evaluate the composition of their own ebook
        backlist.</p>
      <p>To address this gap, there is a need for tools that can help publishers calculate the cost of remediation for
        each segment of their backlist and support them in defining their priorities. These tools should be designed to
        be user-friendly and accessible to publishers of all sizes.</p>
      <p>However, creating and maintaining such tools requires specific investments and a sustainable economic model.
        It's important to ensure that these tools are not only effective in the short term but also viable over the long
        term. This may involve exploring different funding models, such as subscription-based services or partnerships
        with industry stakeholders.</p>
      <p>Ultimately, the goal is to provide publishers with the resources they need to make informed decisions about
        ebook remediation and prioritize accessibility in a way that is sustainable and cost-effective. By doing so, we
        can work towards creating a more inclusive publishing ecosystem that benefits everyone involved.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="enhanced-workflow-documentation" class="level2" >
      <h2 >Enhanced workflow documentation</h2>
      <p>One of the stronger reasons for the permanence of old formats is their long-time integration in production and
        reading environments. Facilitating the production, conversion, enhancement and manipulation of file formats is a
        key factor in helping with their adoption.</p>
      <p>The role of the Readium Foundation in facilitating the building of reading systems has been decisive in the
        diffusion of the standardised EPUB format and created the environment for the rise of economic model
        opportunities, liberating the industry from the silos built by big tech companies. Because open-source SDKs rely
        on standards, it also opened the way to more widely adopted accessibility features in reading systems.</p>
      <p>There is an equivalent need for EPUB production: more authoring tools are needed, and to open the way and shape
        a viable economic environment, documentation and open source SDKs are a way to pave the road. Helping those
        developments is as necessary as the consultancy provided to mainstream products.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="research-on-ai" class="level2" >
      <h2 >Research on AI</h2>
      <p>Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning and other forms of automation can speed up remediation work. However,
        these technologies are far from perfect and sometimes lead to unexpected, if not incorrect, results. Since this
        technology is rapidly evolving, studying and monitoring future developments will be crucial. A
        publisher-oriented solution is also becoming necessary to work on editorial products efficiently.</p>
      <p>Publishers and other actors in the publishing chain have been using automation, including Natural Language
        Processing and Artificial Intelligence technologies, for several years already. Now facing the revolutions of
        Large Language Models (LLM) and Generative AI technologies (GAI), they are observing, testing and defining
        positions towards this technology and its use in editorial workflows. This has led, in some cases, to express
        concerns related to the uncertainty about how their contents and files are used by such systems.</p>
      <p>
        <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page26" aria-label="26"></span>In the current state of the
        art, Machine Learning systems cannot replace the competence and evaluation ability of a human being. If it is
        possible, for example, to automatically generate alternative descriptions for images with AI, it has yet to be
        proved that these alternative descriptions can provide information equivalent to that conveyed by the images
        themself or that they are comparable to those produced by a subject expert. Human decision-making is still key
        to determining whether such descriptions are appropriate for a given context, and there are probably ways to
        facilitate this validation operation.
      </p>
      <p>More accurate results can probably be achieved by additional actions to help conduct machines to the most
        probable correct and pertinent textual alternative and also to help with automated evaluation of this pertinence
        or detect probable wrong or insufficient proposals. These actions can be built only on data mining over large
        curated collections and through multiple iterations. To make sure that such experiments are conducted taking
        into account publishers' concerns and the results are assessed in relation to the real needs of readers, we
        think it is important that professional membership organisations and accessibility experts are involved in
        monitoring research activities.</p>
    </section>
  </section>
  <section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document" epub:type="footnotes">
    <hr />
    <ol>
      <li id="fn1">
        <p>ABELab Communication are available from the Activities section of the abelab webpage:
          https://www.abelab.eu/activities/<a href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p>
      </li>
    </ol>
  </section>
</body>

</html>