<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en-gb" lang="en-gb">

<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8" />
  <title>Abstract</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/blitz_abelab.css" />
</head>

<body epub:type="bodymatter">
  <section id="abstract" class="level1" >
    
    <p>
      <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page3" aria-label="3"></span>
    </p>
    <h1>Abstract</h1>
    <p>
      The European Accessibility Act (EAA)<a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1" epub:type="noteref"
        role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a>
      is a European Union (EU) Directive that
      <i>aims to improve the functioning of the internal market for accessible
        products and services by removing barriers created by divergent rules
        in Member States</i><a href="#fn2" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2" epub:type="noteref"
        role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a>. The EAA will take effect in June 2025, requiring many products and
      services, including ebooks categorised as services, to comply with
      accessibility requirements.
    </p>
    <p>
      One particularly important topic is how a publisher can evaluate the
      impact of converting the inaccessible ebooks of its backlist into
      versions compliant with the accessibility requirements of the EAA.
      Earlier studies have shown very different results. In particular, the
      issues related to different categories of ebooks have not been
      addressed. At the same time, some companies are offering tools for
      converting existing EPUB 2 and PDF files into accessible EPUB 3
      versions, but it is not always so clear which issues these tools
      practically solve.
    </p>
    <p>
      Given the limited timeframe and the fact that many parties have limited
      resources to investigate this topic, we have set up the Accessible
      Backlist Ebooks Laboratory (ABE Lab), a project funded by the EU
      Creative Europe program. The goal of this project is to centralise some
      of the necessary research and share the results with anyone interested.
    </p>
    <p>
      To get insight into the possibilities and costs of remediation, the
      partners of the ABE Lab project, European Digital Reading Lab (EDRLab),
      Fondazione LIA and KB – National Library of the Netherlands, conducted
      research activities to provide information on:
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <p>
          The size and composition of the ebook backlists at European and
          national levels,
        </p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p>Recurrent elements that cause accessibility issues,</p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p>
          how to categorise clusters of ebooks which may have similar
          remediation issues,
        </p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p>
          tools available on the market that can help with the remediation of
          ebooks of different formats (EPUB, PDF) and different categories
          (fiction, non-fiction, STEM, children's book…),
        </p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p>
          costs estimates of remediation<a href="#fn3" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref3" epub:type="noteref"
            role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a>.
        </p>
      </li>
    </ul>
    <p>This final project report is composed of 5 parts:</p>
    <ol type="1">
      <li>
        <p>
          a short introduction presenting the context and the main issues
          addressed by the project, detailing the partners, objectives and
          expected impacts
        </p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p>a summary of the activities conducted and of the methodologies</p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p>
          a part dedicated to the main findings, detailing the most prominent
          challenges to consider
        </p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p>
          an outcomes section resuming the main deliverables of the project
          and
        </p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p>
          a final summary of the state of the art and of possibilities to
          consider for the next steps.
        </p>
      </li>
    </ol>
  </section>
  <section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document" epub:type="footnotes">
    <hr />
    <ol>
      <li id="fn1">
        <p>
          Directive 2019/882 available at:
          <a
            href="https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32019L0882#d1e32-115-1"><u>https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32019L0882#d1e32-115-1</u></a><a
            href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a>
        </p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn2">
        <p>
          <a href="https://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=1202">https://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=1202</a>
          <a href="#fnref2" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a>
        </p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn3">
        <p>
          Since the price of work is strongly different between European
          countries, we are not regarding costs in money but in minutes. Those
          estimate times are a point of reference but must be considered in
          relation to publisher’s national realities and per each collection
          in depth analysis.<a href="#fnref3" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a>
        </p>
      </li>
    </ol>
  </section>
</body>

</html>