<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en-gb" lang="en-gb">

<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8" />

  <title>Findings: a diverse ecosystem</title>

  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/blitz_abelab.css" />
</head>

<body epub:type="bodymatter">
  <section id="findings-a-diverse-ecosystem" class="level1" >
    <p>
      <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page13" aria-label="13"></span>
    </p>
    <h1 >Findings: a diverse ecosystem</h1>
    <section id="high-variability-of-available-data" class="level2" >
      <h2 >High variability of available data</h2>
      <p>Collecting data on the backlist ebook titles available over Europe resulted in a challenging activity since no
        centralised agency exists and the way industry standards are adopted and used is not yet consistent across all
        European countries (including identification, categorizations, and other bibliographic metadata).</p>
      <p>There’s a notable blind spot regarding the ebooks available through large online international platforms like
        Amazon and Kobo. We do not know how much of those contents are exclusive (like self-published titles), and
        therefore, remediation needs cannot be studied for these ebooks.</p>
      <p>Regarding the ebooks available for any reseller or library, no centralised or harmonised system exists to
        collect data, resulting in the need to collect data from different sources (ISBN agencies, national libraries,
        distributors<a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1" epub:type="noteref"
          role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a>, aggregators<a href="#fn2" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2"
          epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a> and data service providers). Therefore, counting the
        ebooks available on the EU market revealed some caveats:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <p>some titles are published in more than one digital format (like EPUB, PDF, KF8), which results in counting
            manifestations<a href="#fn3" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref3" epub:type="noteref"
              role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a>, not unique works;</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>some ebook titles get a new ISBN with a new version, so again, we do not count unique works, but different
            manifestations of the same ebook;</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>some ISBN agencies do not assign directly ISBNs on a per-title basis. Instead, they give publishers a large
            range of numbers to use and the publishers themselves assign the ISBNs to their titles. As a result, these
            ISBN agencies do not have a record of how many titles are published;</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>not all ISBN agencies are informed when ebooks are withdrawn from the market;</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>some distributors and aggregators handle only a part of the market. For instance, only trade books or
            scientific books, or only books in certain languages, meaning that relying on data provided by a single
            distributor or aggregator is insufficient to obtain a complete overview, and we must therefore extend the
            collection to multiple parties. In addition, when we receive aggregated data and not detailed information to
            the individual ISBN level, it is impossible to know if different collections overlap and how relevant this
            overlap is, so we need to be careful with putting these together;</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>some EU distributors and aggregators supply titles from non-EU publishers in addition to titles published
            in their country. Without detailed data and information, it is impossible to distinguish between titles that
            are published in the country itself and titles produced by foreign publishers, which also might have an
            overlap with the titles we count in other EU countries;</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>retailers sometimes collect titles from multiple distributors and aggregators, so it is also not possible
            to rely purely on the numbers resellers provide; platforms that operate worldwide hardly provide detailed
            information about their collections. And since they operate differently, their collections are not even
            directly comparable to those of the traditional ‘publisher-distributor-<span epub:type="pagebreak"
              role="doc-pagebreak" id="page14" aria-label="14"></span>retailer’ chains. For example, Amazon does not
            only provide ebooks with an ISBN, which is produced by publishers but also a lot of self-published titles,
            often without an ISBN.</p>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </section>
    <section id="the-european-backlist-is-not-homogeneous" class="level2" >
      <h2 >The European backlist is not homogeneous </h2>
      <p>Beyond difficulties in collecting and harmonising available information, the analysis of backlist data showed
        that big differences exist between the collections of different EU countries, and no common denominator is
        emerging. Even repartition based on the size of the national backlist is not sufficient to categorise the
        European market.</p>
      <p>To group titles for our project, we chose to refer to the Thema subject category scheme<a href="#fn4"
          class="footnote-ref" id="fnref4" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>4</sup></a> developed and
        maintained by EDItEUR. Thema aims to be the subject categorization scheme for a global book trade and is
        currently the most commonly used classification methodology. Even if the use of Thema classification has
        progressed a lot in the last few years, it must be noted that is not the only classification used, and since it
        is still relatively new, not all ebooks have been assigned Thema codes yet.</p>
      <p>To resolve this inconsistency, EDItEUR provides a series of documents mapping codes from different book schemas
        to Thema codes.<a href="#fn5" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref5" epub:type="noteref"
          role="doc-noteref"><sup>5</sup></a> Because different standard classifications have different logics, those
        mappings may not always be one-to-one and sometimes need interpretation. One example is the CLIL<a href="#fn6"
          class="footnote-ref" id="fnref6" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>6</sup></a> to Thema mapping,
        where the Young Adults category can be mapped to two main Thema categories: Fiction (Thema code F) and Children,
        Teenage and Educational (Thema code Y). As a consequence, we had to spend time on understanding differences in
        classification methodologies and which choices to apply to our mappings.</p>
      <p>The gap analysis shows that the heavy presence of images and visual resources appears to be the main criterion
        of demarcation between categories that will reclaim more efforts to remediate (Medicine, Earth sciences and
        Sports) and others (Fiction, Philosophy, Religion and Law) that are mainly text based and will be easier to
        remediate.</p>
      <p>In the end, only the extraction of statistics from the files can provide scorings capable of efficiently
        slicing large collections into sets of ebooks with similar needs. Such an activity can help not only with
        categorising accessibility needs but also with having a better view of what contents are inside different ebooks
        (like the number of images, number of pages, etc.).</p>
    </section>
    <section id="mark15developments-go-slowmark" class="level2" >
      <p>
        <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page15" aria-label="15"></span>
      </p>
      <h2 >
        <mark>Developments go slow</mark>
      </h2>
      <p>Newer formats (like EPUB 3) are not adopted quickly. The newer possibilities they offer (like reflow for EPUB
        over PDF, better semantics for EPUB 3 over EPUB 2) do not cause older formats (like EPUB 2 or PDF) to be
        immediately replaced. This causes difficulties as the remediation work is more complex when dealing with older
        formats. Like the chicken and egg problem, the adoption of newer formats is slowed by the lack of support by
        main desktop tools who are not willing to invest in supporting less adopted formats. Consequently, conversion
        services and proprietary tools have flourished, and too few open-source tools and documentation are available.
      </p>
      <section id="markconversion-tools-as-options-for-remediationmark" class="level3" >
        <h3 >
          <mark>Conversion tools as options for remediation</mark>
        </h3>
        <p>Our research and discussions with the developers of the tools have made it clear that many remediation tools
          were designed and developed to respond to the internal needs of a specific publishing house or a service
          provider working for one or more publishing houses, usually in the continuity of the existing tools and
          contracts. Most of these solutions are marketed as ebook <i>conversion</i> tools or used in the context of
          <i>conversion services</i>. Therefore, most of these tools are under continuous development and evolve to meet
          the needs of different clients’ collections and specific requests.</p>
        <p>To understand how these technological solutions can concretely fit into the workflows of publishing houses,
          it is important to underline that publishers can decide to use different tools to correct different
          accessibility problems, based on what the different solutions are capable of doing, for what formats and with
          what level of accuracy, which makes the remediation process a composite and complex one.</p>
        <p>Since digital accessibility is becoming an increasingly important topic, the issue of remediating
          inaccessible ebooks and digital documents is becoming increasingly important too. Consequently, the landscape
          of remediation tools is bound to evolve and expand. For this reason, we will continue to monitor the supply of
          these tools even after the conclusion of the project and we’ll update the dedicated list<a href="#fn7"
            class="footnote-ref" id="fnref7" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>7</sup></a> on the official ABE
          Lab website should we find new tools, since this represents valuable information for publishing professionals.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section
        id="markfew-markopen-sourcemark-tools-and-markdmarkocumentation-about-automatmarkionmark-markare-markavailablemark"
        class="level3" >
        <h3 >
          <mark>Few </mark>open-source<mark> tools and </mark>d<mark>ocumentation about
            automat</mark>ion<mark></mark>are <mark>available</mark>
        </h3>
        <p>Our research and discussions with publishers, service providers and tools producers showed that a lot of
          automation is used at every level, but the rules applied for analysis and automation are established over
          experience and kept in-house. A reason for that can be found in the fact that it’s almost impossible to
          average the errors in the backlist titles and that there’s a will (and a need) to keep a commercial advantage.
          However, the consequence is that it is not possible to rely on industry-accepted rules to make sure that
          automation is performed for the best.</p>
        <p>Regarding the availability of open-source tools that can be securely incorporated into remediation workflows,
          we discovered a limited number of available solutions beyond the widely recognised conformance checkers named
          EPUBCheck and ACE by DAISY.</p>
        <p>These tools have become the industry standard and are already integrated into many publishers' production
          workflows. While incorporating these tools into workflows is a positive step, it's crucial to take note of the
          <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page16" aria-label="16"></span>ACE developers'
          disclaimer: <i>It is important to keep in mind that only a limited portion of accessibility checks can be
            automated, and therefore, Ace is not a complete accessibility conformance evaluation tool; instead, it is an
            aid for a broader, human-driven evaluation process.</i></p>
        <p>The lack of recognised tools is somewhat worrying, as it suggests that most accessibility issues are
          addressed using in-house developed solutions. This results in redundant efforts when selecting and evaluating
          the quality of remediation operations.</p>
        <p>The availability of open-source solutions does not imply that remediation tools necessarily have to use them,
          but knowing what the open-source community has already produced can be a good starting point when designing
          and developing, especially if these products are actively maintained and updated.</p>
        <p>All primary areas of software development extensively utilise existing components provided by the open-source
          ecosystem. It is vital to the software development landscape, offering scalability, flexibility, and
          robustness. It helps everyone in the ecosystem save time and money, enhance quality and security, foster
          innovation and collaboration, and gain a competitive edge in the market.</p>
      </section>
    </section>
    <section id="is-there-a-market-for-remediation-tools" class="level2" >
      <h2 >Is there a market for remediation tools?</h2>
      <p>Publishing is an umbrella name for activities related to the creation and transmission of culture through
        books. Many different professional profiles work in the industry. From rights acquisitions to innovative
        marketing techniques, the shared knowledge about ebooks and digital reading is not so wide and broad.</p>
      <p>ebook sales represent around 12%<a href="#fn8" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref8" epub:type="noteref"
          role="doc-noteref"><sup>8</sup></a> in the best cases, and are still usually a digital replica of the printed
        object, being as much as possible similar to the paper object.</p>
      <p>Publishing houses, except the bigger ones who may have an internal digital department, rely on the expertise of
        specialised external services for the conversion in digital versions of the printed ones..</p>
      <p>Therefore, the following question arises: is there a market for remediation tools dedicated to publishers? Or
        should we think that service providers are the target of remediation tools vendors?</p>
      <section id="post-cmarkonversion-over-born-accessiblemark" class="level3" >
        <h3 >Post c<mark>onversion over born accessible</mark></h3>
        <p>Accessibility experts have long emphasised the importance of considering accessibility from the beginning of
          the publishing process, as it can make a significant difference at a minimal additional cost. <a href="#fn9"
            class="footnote-ref" id="fnref9" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>9</sup></a>. This is also a key
          principle of digital-first workflows and single-source publishing.</p>
        <p>However, the reality is that the publishing industry is still largely focused on print. Books are typically
          designed for the printed edition first, and then converted to create an ebook. This means that many ebooks,
          especially those in the backlist, are missing important digital information about their structure and
          formatting.</p>
        <p>Instead, the structure of the book is often represented visually, such as using italics for quotes or
          different fonts for headings. Only a few publishing workflows are set up to manage rich semantic structures
          and create ebooks that are natively accessible.</p>
        <p>
          <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page17" aria-label="17"></span>There are tools that can
          facilitate the conversion process, but they are often linked to a specific service or offered as part of
          hybrid licences, such as software as a service or different levels of conversion service.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section id="markexternal-expertisemark" class="level3" >
        <h3 >
          <mark>External expertise</mark>
        </h3>
        <p>As done for the creation of the digital versions, most publishers view accessibility expertise as a service
          provided by third-party contractors, rather than an inherent part of their own production process. However,
          the definition of accessibility expertise is not well-established, and publishers may encounter varying levels
          of quality and accuracy in the services they receive. This can lead to different experiences, including
          misleading or deceptive practices that fail to meet the necessary accessibility standards. As a result,
          publishers must exercise caution and carefully vet potential contractors to ensure they possess the necessary
          expertise and can deliver high-quality accessible ebooks.</p>
        <p>France and Italy are exceptions where publisher associations provide accessibility expertise. In France, this
          is done through guidelines and discussions established by the <i>Normes et Standards</i> working group. In
          Italy, this is done through the awareness of the topic raised by Fondazione LIA, which is strongly related to
          the Italian Publishers Association.</p>
        <p>Many countries are still in the process of finding an effective approach to accessible publishing.
          Collaborations between publishers and specialised organization serving people with disabilities which may have
          specific knowledge on some aspect of accessibility, may be fruitful. The Apace project<a href="#fn10"
            class="footnote-ref" id="fnref10" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>10</sup></a>, recently funded
          in the Creative Europe programme, will promote this collaboration helping to pave the way for a more inclusive
          publishing future.</p>
      </section>
    </section>
  </section>
  <section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document" epub:type="footnotes">
    <hr />
    <ol>
      <li id="fn1">
        <p>We define a distributor as an entity that collects and distributes files to selling platforms. The
          distributor also establishes or collects metadata and sends them to aggregators.<a href="#fnref1"
            class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn2">
        <p>We define aggregators as an entity who collects established metadata and distributes them to selling
          platforms.<a href="#fnref2" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn3">
        <p>With manifestation we refer to a physical or digital embodiment of a work as defined in bibliographic record
          standards <a
            href="https://www.loc.gov/marc/marbi/2009/2009-01-3.html"><u>(https://www.loc.gov/marc/marbi/2009/2009-01-3.html</u></a>).
          For example in the digital world an EPUB and a PDF of the same title are counted as two different
          manifestations.<a href="#fnref3" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn4">
        <p>
          <a href="https://ns.editeur.org/thema/en">
            <i>
              <u>Thema – the subject category scheme for a global book trade version 1.5</u>
            </i>
          </a>, EDItEUR, 2022. Available at <a
            href="https://ns.editeur.org/thema/en">https://ns.editeur.org/thema/en</a><a href="#fnref4"
            class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a>
        </p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn5">
        <p>
          <a href="https://www.editeur.org/151/Thema/#Mappings">
            <i>
              <u>Thema mappings</u>
            </i>
          </a>, EDItEUR, 2023. Available at <a
            href="https://www.editeur.org/151/Thema/#Mappings"><u>https://www.editeur.org/151/Thema/#Mappings</u></a><a
            href="#fnref5" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a>
        </p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn6">
        <p>
          <i>Commission de Liaison Interprofessionnelle du Livre</i>, the French standard for book classification.
          Available art <a
            href="https://clil.centprod.com/listeActive.html"><u>https://clil.centprod.com/listeActive.html</u></a><a
            href="#fnref6" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a>
        </p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn7">
        <p>Tools for remediation tested in the ABELab project context: https://www.abelab.eu/activities/tools/<a
            href="#fnref7" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn8">
        <p>European Book Publishing Statistics 2022, Federation of European Publishers (FEP).
          https://fep-fee.eu/European-Book-Publishing-Statistics-2022<a href="#fnref8" class="footnote-back"
            role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn9">
        <p>See, for example: <a
            href="https://daisy.org/info-help/time-to-use-the-modern-digital-publishing-format/"><u>https://daisy.org/info-help/time-to-use-the-modern-digital-publishing-format/</u></a><a
            href="#fnref9" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn10">
        <p>
          <a
            href="https://www.fondazionelia.org/en/project/2024-apace-accelerating-publishing-accessibility-through-collaboration-in-europe/">https://www.fondazionelia.org/en/project/2024-apace-accelerating-publishing-accessibility-through-collaboration-in-europe/</a>
          <a href="#fnref10" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a>
        </p>
      </li>
    </ol>
  </section>
</body>

</html>