<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en-gb" lang="en-gb">

<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8" />

  <title>Activities</title>

  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/blitz_abelab.css" />
</head>

<body epub:type="bodymatter">
  <section id="activities" class="level1" >
    
      <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page8" aria-label="8"></span>
    
    <h1 >Activities</h1>
    <p>The ABE Lab project aims to provide publishers with reliable information about options and costs for remediation
      to make backlist ebooks accessible. This project objective was achieved by collecting and analysing data about the
      European ebook backlist and analysing and testing the processes and workflows by which ebooks of different types
      and formats (PDF, EPUB reflowable and EPUB Fixed Layout) can be transformed into accessible EPUB in the easiest
      and less expensive way. This implies knowing which remediation tools are available on the market and what they can
      do, for which formats and types of books (fiction, complex layouts, STEM) they are most effective, and their
      shortcomings.</p>
    <p>The first part of the project was therefore focused on collecting and analysing data to define the size and
      composition of the European ebook backlist—defined as the collection of all ebooks available on the EU market—and
      on identifying the most recurrent accessibility issues in these ebooks. The public deliverable Report on Backlist
      Data and Gap Analysis details the results.</p>
    <p>In the second part, the partners tested several workflows using existing open-source and commercial tools to
      remediate inaccessible ebooks of different types and formats (PDF, EPUB 2, EPUB 3 reflowable, and Fixed Layout).
      The study considered ebooks with different levels of complexity to evaluate the relative effort associated with
      correcting the accessibility issues.</p>
    <p>It is essential to have tools that can correct the accessibility errors identified in the backlist files or offer
      the human operators options and features that support them in their remediation activity. Consequently, testing
      existing remediation tools has been fundamental to ABE Lab. The results of these tests form the basis of the
      whitepaper <i>Guidelines for remediation tool producers</i> and the starting point of the guidance we can provide
      to publishers as an outcome of the project<i>.</i></p>
    <section id="project-management-wp1" class="level2" >
      <h2 >Project management (WP1)</h2>
      <p>The project was coordinated by EDRLab, operated by a core team, and strategically driven by a Steering
        Committee. The project partners allocated additional resources for each work package. All working documents were
        stored on a shared drive, and communication was mainly by email. A chat solution was also available for daily
        discussions.</p>
      <p>The project core team met online regularly and performed all activities. The Steering Committee met two times
        in person and three times online. Two status reports were produced at 6 and 12 months. All decisions were made
        on consensus.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="mark9analysis-of-the-composition-of-ebook-backlists-in-europe-wp2mark" class="level2"
      >
      
        <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page9" aria-label="9"></span>
      
      <h2 >
        Analysis of the composition of ebook backlists in Europe (WP2)
      </h2>
      <p>This activity was composed of two tasks: collecting data on the European ebook backlist and analysing them, and
        collecting backlist ebooks from publishers from different EU countries. Details are given in the <a
          href="https://www.abelab.eu/outcomes/deliverables/#report-on-backlist-data-and-gap-analysis"><i>Report on
            Backlist Data and gap analysis</i></a><a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1" epub:type="noteref"
          role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a>.</p>
      <section id="markbacklist-datamark" class="level3" >
        <h3 >
          Backlist Data
        </h3>
        <p>Without specific information about the composition of ebook backlists in Europe, it's challenging to
          determine the best workflows, remediation costs, and potential growth of accessible ebooks before and after
          the European Accessibility Act (EAA). This lack of data also makes it hard to measure the EAA's success in the
          ebook industry. To plan the next steps of the project, data was collected and analysed. This formed the basis
          for subsequent reports publicly published.</p>
        <p>As there's no single European source providing data about the number and types of ebooks available, many
          organisations were contacted. These include publication registration offices, distributors, aggregators,
          resellers, and national libraries. However, since each organisation only has a portion of the data, and there
          are overlaps, conclusions must be drawn carefully. A blind spot is that a significant part of the EU market's
          ebook backlist comes from e-commerce platforms and international distributors and retailers, especially those
          from the UK, the USA, and Canada.</p>
        <p>The report examines the size and composition of EU ebooks backlists and their segmentation and provides
          useful trends and insights for the research on the topic. It outlines the approach taken, including challenges
          faced, and gives an overview of the segmentation by subject, format, and year of production. The main findings
          are summarised in the <i>Insights</i> section, and the <i>Outcomes</i> section explains how this work was used
          to shape subsequent project activities.</p>
      </section>
      <section id="markgap-analysismark" class="level3" >
        <h3 >
          Gap Analysis
        </h3>
        <p>The objective of this activity was to provide an overview of the gaps between the accessibility level of the
          ebook titles available on the EU market and the EAA target accessibility requirements. The report exposes an
          analysis methodology to help identify recurrent accessibility issues per category of ebooks that will need
          remediation to meet the EAA requirements.</p>
        <p>This analysis was possible thanks to the collaboration with publishing houses that agreed to provide us with
          samples of their existing ebooks, matching a wishlist established to reflect the articulation of the backlists
          as well as possible. These publishers received a document describing in detail the methodology developed and
          applied to identify the most recurrent accessibility issues and classify the ebooks according to the potential
          complexity of the remediation activity needed to make them accessible. This document was released on the 30th
          of October 2023 and was shared with contributing publishers only.</p>
      </section>
    </section>
    <section id="mark10analysis-of-remediation-processes-and-workflows-wp3mark" class="level2" >
      
        <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page10" aria-label="10"></span>
      
      <h2 >
        Analysis of remediation processes and workflows (WP3)
      </h2>
      <p>This activity was the basis of internal intermediary documents and a <a
          href="https://github.com/ABELaboratory/publications/deliverables/guidelines-remediation-tools-producers"><i><u><u>Guidelines
                for remediation tools producers</u></u></i></a><a href="#fn2" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2"
          epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a> available on the ABE Lab website.</p>
      <p>It is crucial to know which technological solutions for remediating inaccessible ebooks are available on the
        market and in the open-source community, what they can do, and with which level of accuracy. This information is
        key to providing publishers with reliable indications on which tools they can use to remediate their backlist
        ebooks. The choice may depend on ebook categories (fiction, biography, law, STEM, ...), input formats, desired
        output formats and specific accessibility issues of the input files.</p>
      <p>Therefore, the objectives of this activity were to:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <p>identify the available tools;</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>establish a testing methodology for assigning a score to the tools based on the results produced;</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>provide an overview of the tools tested, divided by remediation flows. For each tested tool it includes
            general information about the product, its evaluation and the score it has obtained.</p>
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>Discovering and testing the remediation tools available on the market or developed by the open-source community
        was the focus of the second phase of the project. This phase consisted of the following macro activities:</p>
      <ol type="1">
        <li>
          <p>active search for remediation tools. The tools were found through desk research and by exploiting the
            professional network of the project partners;</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>mapping the functionalities of these tools using a matrix of functionalities;</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>expert people testing the tools and analysing the remediated files to assess their performance, i.e. which
            accessibility issues they can solve automatically or semi-automatically, and assessing the extent of manual
            intervention that each tool requires to output a fully accessible ebook.</p>
        </li>
      </ol>
      <p>Our research allowed us to identify 24 remediation tools, of which 13 were selected for the testing phase.
        Aside from the internal report on this activity, a public white paper was published to provide high-level
        guidelines that producers and developers of remediation tools can use to design or improve their tools. This
        white paper highlights the requirements that remediation tools should meet to be effective and to support human
        operators by making the process as simple, intuitive and fluid as possible, depending also on the competence of
        the target users. These activities are detailed in internal documents that have been used to build the public
        deliverables.</p>
      <p>This is the first time, as far as we know, that a study has conducted systematic tests on this category of
        tools to assess their potential and limitations.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="mark11analysis-of-remediation-costs-wp4mark" class="level2" >
      
        <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page11" aria-label="11"></span>
      
      <h2 >
        Analysis of remediation costs (WP4)
      </h2>
      <p>Previous activities have helped the project partners better understand the composition of the EU ebook
        backlist, establish a gap analysis methodology and test remediation tools. The main activity of this WP was to
        estimate the time and cost of all the activities that publishers and actors involved in ebook production must
        undertake to remediate backlist titles.</p>
      <p>To achieve that, we proceeded in two ways: on one side, we interviewed publishers who have already started
        remediating their backlist, and on the other, we conducted tests to obtain representative times for the
        correction of specific accessibility problems and the entire remediation process for selected samples of varying
        size and complexity.</p>
      <p>Interviewing publishers allowed us to determine that understanding the evolution of production processes is
        crucial. It also emphasised the need for prior analysis and for gathering information about effective practices.
        Publishers who outsource all of their ebook production mentioned that they struggle to evaluate the technical
        condition of their backlist titles.. The preferred method for these publishers is to first examine the economic
        feasibility of making their backlist titles accessible. They estimate which titles would be worth investing a
        similar amount to creating a new accessible ebook, and then request price quotes from their service providers.
      </p>
      <p>For testing activity, we first selected, based on our analysis, files with an average number of accessibility
        issues from different categories and formats (PDF, EPUB and EPUB Fixed Layout) out of the samples that
        collaborating publishers provided in WP2. The choice was a balanced mixture between what is most represented,
        and the actual files we had at disposal. We selected thema identifiers F, Y, J, M, L, (respectively, for
        Fiction, Children’s books, Society and social sciences, Medicine and Nursing, Law) and refined them with an
        analysis of the features available in each file.</p>
      <p>Based on WP3's findings, a set of tools was selected for remediating each sample based on the starting format
        and the complexity of the content (images, links, tables, notes, …). The remediation was carried out by an
        experienced operator who has previously handled conversion and remediation activities, with an in-depth
        knowledge of publishers' production workflows, a proven track record in page layout programs (InDesign), and a
        solid understanding of ebooks accessibility requirements. The remediation process was structured into several
        steps:</p>
      <ol type="1">
        <li>
          <p>automatic remediation, to assess what the tools can fix automatically;</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>tool-driven remediation (through accessibility error reports provided by the tool, in-tool guidance, etc.);
          </p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>manual remediation within the tool, using the options and functionalities provided by the tools itself;</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>manual remediation using different tools, to correct those accessibility errors that the tool does not
            allow to be corrected effectively and, therefore, are still found in the output of step 3. Fixing these
            errors usually requires direct intervention in the HTML code (we, therefore, used an editor software named
            Sigil, which allows us to manipulate the EPUB code);</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>semantic enrichment. This was an additional step aimed at getting semantically richer EPUBs beyond the
            compliance strictly needed to be in line with the accessibility requirements defined by the EAA.</p>
        </li>
      </ol>
      <p>We also conducted two preliminary actions:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <p>file analysis to assess possible problems and</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>file format conversion, when necessary.</p>
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page12" aria-label="12"></span>We monitored the time
        required for the execution of each step using a matrix prepared for this purpose. For each step, we reported the
        time required to correct the different accessibility problems, starting with the most recurring ones from the
        gap analysis of WP2. This allowed us, for each combination of file and tool, to:
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <p>know the total time needed for each step;</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>identify which accessibility issues can actually be fixed in each step (thus, for each tool, which can be
            corrected in step 1 automatically, and which require manual intervention with the same or a different tool);
          </p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>know the time required to solve each accessibility issue in the step in which it was solved (except for
            step 1, for which only the total time can be measured).</p>
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>In the case of step 1 (automatic remediation), the total time required for the tool to complete the process was
        reported aside as time spent by the machine is not priced the same as human time.</p>
      <p>This approach allowed us to have an overall, detailed overview of the time associated with the remediation
        activity for each file and tool. The related internal deliverable <i>Cost benchmark report</i> (SEN) was
        finalised on the 15th of April, 2024.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="markcommunication-and-dissemination-wp5mark" class="level2" >
      <h2 >
        Communication and Dissemination (WP5)
      </h2>
      <p>The project communication and dissemination activities are conducted in 3 main temporalities:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <p>an initial communication period to inform about the project;</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>a continuous information delivery;</p>
        </li>
        <li>
          <p>a final communication stage.</p>
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>The initial communication's objective was to enlist publishers interested in the project. This was done at the
        first level with national workshops and individual talks in France, Italy and the Netherlands in local languages
        and organised independently by each project partner. At a second level, we presented the project in English to
        publishers' associations with the help of the Federation of European Publishers. We also presented the project
        to Inclusive Publishing members and at the Include! Conference organised by MTM, the Swedish agency for
        accessible books in Malmö, Sweden. Complementary to those presentations, the three project partners produced
        news on their website and communication on their social media. A blog article was published by IPA. This phase
        allowed for widespread knowledge about the project and provided us with more publishers willing to collaborate
        with the project than expected.</p>
      <p>Continuous information was spread throughout the project, with key points for releasing public deliverables,
        for which webinars were organised to give direct feedback to the publishers involved in the project. The project
        was also presented at book fairs in Bruxelles and Bologna.</p>
      <p>The final communication stage starts with the publication of this final report and will be composed of
        workshops at national and international levels. Press releases, event presence and material used in public
        presentations are available on the project website<a href="#fn3" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref3"
          epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a>.</p>
    </section>
  </section>
  <section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document" epub:type="footnotes">
    <hr />
    <ol>
      <li id="fn1">
        <p>
          <i>Report on Backlist Data and gap analysis</i>, Released on 2023, October the 30th. Diffusion: Public.
          Available at <a
            href="https://www.abelab.eu/outcomes/deliverables/#report-on-backlist-data-and-gap-analysis"><u>https://www.abelab.eu/outcomes/deliverables/#report-on-backlist-data-and-gap-analysis</u></a>
         <a href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a>
        </p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn2">
        <p>
          <i>Guidelines for remediation tools producers</i>, Released on 2024, April the 25th. Diffusion: Public.
          Available as HTML, EPUB and PDF at <a
            href="https://github.com/ABELaboratory/publications/deliverables/guidelines-remediation-tools-producers"><u>https://github.com/ABELaboratory/publications/deliverables/guidelines-remediation-tools-producers</u></a>
        <a href="#fnref2" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a>
        </p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn3">
        <p>
          <a href="https://www.abelab.eu/">https://www.abelab.eu/</a>
          <a href="#fnref3" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a>
        </p>
      </li>
    </ol>
  </section>
</body>

</html>