<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en-gb" lang="en-gb">

<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8" />
  <title>Context</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/blitz_abelab.css" />
</head>

<body epub:type="bodymatter">
  <section id="context" class="level1" >
    <p>
      <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page4" aria-label="4"></span>
    </p>
    <h1 >Context</h1>
    <p>According to a World Blind Union (WBU) estimation, persons with reading disabilities - for instance, blind,
      visually impaired or dyslexic people - have access to less than 10 per cent of the yearly book production<a
        href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a>, depending
      on the country they live in. The term “book famine” was coined some years ago to describe this. The books they
      have access to are, in most cases, specific adaptations of printed books created in small quantities by
      specialised libraries, associations for the blind, or similar organisations, or digital books whose level of
      accessibility can vary greatly.</p>
    <p>The European Accessibility Act (Directive (EU) 2019/882, acronym EAA) will come into force in June 2025. The
      Directive mandates that various services, including ebooks, adhere to accessibility requirements, in line with the
      principles of <i>design for all</i> and <i>born accessible</i>. This means taking into account all the needs and
      possibilities from the conception of the services to be able to create quality services that can be used also by
      people with disabilities. It is part of the European strategy for the rights of persons with disabilities
      2021-2030<a href="#fn2" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a>,
      which addresses several major themes: accessibility, equality, education, social protection, employment and more.
      With this, Europe is committed to an inclusive policy that makes people with disabilities a core objective.</p>
    <p>The publishing industry worldwide agrees that EPUB is the only digital book format that allows, with a few
      efforts, the creation of fully accessible ebooks. Most titles have already been published in EPUB, and the first
      accessible titles are now on sale.</p>
    <p>However, there is still an issue with the majority of ebooks published before 2025: a backlist of 3.5 million
      titles in Europe. Since one of the objectives of the Directive is to end the book famine endured by visually
      impaired people, it is important to transform as many titles as possible into accessible EPUB files. To do so,
      publishers need to have a clear view of the gaps to be filled to make their ebooks compliant and of the related
      costs per type of ebook.</p>
    <section id="markwhat-is-accessibilitymark" class="level2" >
      <h2 >
        What is accessibility?
      </h2>
      <p>Accessibility means that tools, technologies, websites, ebooks and digital documents are designed and developed
        so that everyone, regardless of their disabilities - physical, cognitive, motor, situational or age-related -
        can use them. Accessibility is fundamental to providing equal access to information, study, entertainment and
        equal opportunities to people with disabilities.</p>
      <p>In addition to being required by the regulatory frameworks in many countries worldwide, accessibility is a
        social value and a basic human right recognised by the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with
        Disabilities (UN CRPD)<a href="#fn3" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref3" epub:type="noteref"
          role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a>.</p>
      <p>Accessibility is also part of a global quality process. It is good for business, improving the experience and
        satisfaction for all users. This means that attention has been paid to providing correct hierarchy and semantic
        tagging of the information, that rich and understandable navigation options are available, and that information
        about the available features is properly provided. By enforcing standards rules, accessibility also <span
          epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page5" aria-label="5"></span>helps with translations,
        derivations, and preservation by guaranteeing a more strict homogeneity of the collections.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="what-are-remediation-tools" class="level2" >
      <h2 >What are remediation tools?</h2>
      <p>In recent years, accessibility in the digital world has become increasingly relevant, especially in light of
        the new European and national regulatory frameworks.</p>
      <p>This has led to improvements in ebook production tools, which have progressively integrated specific
        functionalities to support the production of accessible EPUB and PDF files, allowing publishers to publish and
        market ebooks that are already accessible, following the <i>born accessible</i> paradigm. Not only the tools but
        the formats themselves have evolved in terms of the accessibility features supported, and accessible guidelines
        for the EPUB and PDF formats have been published, providing publishers with clear reference specifications to
        produce accessible ebooks compliant with international and EAA accessibility requirements. As a consequence,
        production workflows have also started to take accessibility into account.</p>
      <p>A new type of tool and service is increasingly emerging to fix the accessibility of ebooks and digital
        documents produced in past years. These tools, which may take the form of online cloud platforms, desktop
        applications, or SDKs, are designed to receive an ebook or digital document that does not comply with
        international accessibility requirements as input and return an ebook that should be accessible and compliant as
        output.</p>
      <p>They come with different features and access methods: some can be freely downloaded and used, while others
        require a paid account activation and configuration, which in turn may require direct contact with the
        developers and marketing or sales managers. The types of licences may also differ by tool provider: they may
        provide unlimited access to the tool or include a maximum number of files uploaded and remediated; they can
        provide a monthly, semestrial, annual or other subscription formula, often different for private users and
        companies. Some are fully automatic, while others allow the manual modification of the document content.</p>
      <p>Finally, tools based on Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence are also beginning to appear and spread;
        these tools can potentially be trained to respond to the specific needs of a publisher's workflow or the
        characteristics of a specific ebook series.</p>
      <p>As can be seen, the world of these tools is very composite and varied. In this document, we’ll refer to these
        types of technological solutions as <i>remediation tools</i>.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="mark6the-abe-lab-projectmark" class="level2" >
      <p>
        <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page6" aria-label="6"></span>
      </p>
      <h2 >
        The ABE Lab project
      </h2>
      <section id="markobjectives-and-expected-impacts-of-the-projectmark" class="level3" >
        <h3 >
          Objectives and expected impacts of the project
        </h3>
        <p>ABE Lab has two main objectives:</p>
        <ul>
          <li>
            <p>to collect and analyse in detail the composition of the European ebook backlist;</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>to provide guidelines to European publishers to boost the remediation of the ebooks from their backlist.
            </p>
          </li>
        </ul>
        <p>The main expected impacts in the short term (before 2025) are the following:</p>
        <ul>
          <li>
            <p>Publishers, Publisher Associations, blind unions, and public services have, for the first time, a clear
              picture of the status of the European ebook backlist;</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Publishers can use the classification to evaluate the composition of their own ebook backlist;</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Some larger publishers and service providers will build remediation workflows;</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Ebooks that are easy to remediate will be processed through these technical workflows;</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Publishers can calculate the cost of remediation for each segment of their backlist and decide on
              priorities for remediation.</p>
          </li>
        </ul>
        <p>In the medium term (2025, 2026), the expected impacts are that:</p>
        <ul>
          <li>
            <p>More publishers and service providers will build remediation workflows;</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>The analysis of the first bulk of remediation will enhance the efficiency of the technical workflows.
              More automated processes and Artificial Intelligence techniques will be integrated into the remediation
              tools;</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Ebooks that necessitate limited manual processing will be processed through enhanced technical workflows;
            </p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Publishers can use this analysis to evaluate the cost of generation of natively accessible EPUB 3 ebooks.
            </p>
          </li>
        </ul>
        <p>In the long term (2026, 2030), the expected impacts are that:</p>
        <ul>
          <li>
            <p>Every European publisher has chosen which backlist ebooks will be made accessible, which titles will be
              considered disproportionately burdensome, and which titles will be removed from the market;</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Ebooks deemed to be made accessible will be processed through enhanced technical workflows;</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>EPUB 3 eventually replaced older ebook formats (PDF, EPUB 2).</p>
          </li>
        </ul>
      </section>
      <section id="mark7the-partnersmark" class="level3" >
        <p>
          <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page7" aria-label="7"></span>
        </p>
        <h3 >
          The partners
        </h3>
        <p>The Accessible Backlist Ebooks Laboratory (ABE Lab) is a European Cooperation project funded by Creative
          Europe. The project is coordinated by the European Digital Reading Lab (EDRLab<a href="#fn4"
            class="footnote-ref" id="fnref4" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>4</sup></a>); Fondazione LIA<a
            href="#fn5" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref5" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>5</sup></a> and the
          National Library of the Netherlands (Koninklijke Bibliotheek - KB<a href="#fn6" class="footnote-ref"
            id="fnref6" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>6</sup></a>) are partners.</p>
        <p>EDRLab is a non-profit transnational laboratory that develops open standards and open-source tools to
          accelerate the diffusion of digital technologies in the publishing industry. It is an association of more than
          75 members from the publishing industry, including publishers, providers of publishing services, distributors,
          tool developers, and accessibility specialists. EDRLab is also the developer of the Thorium Reader
          application, a free and highly accessible reading application for EPUB 3 ebooks, and LCP, a non-proprietary
          DRM for ebooks.</p>
        <p>Fondazione LIA is an Italian non-profit organisation and an internationally recognised expert in the
          certification of accessibility of EPUB 3 ebooks, having already certified more than 35.000 ebooks available in
          the <i>www.libriitalianiaccessibili.it</i> catalogue. Fondazione LIA carries out research and development
          activities in the field of digital accessibility, organises awareness-raising events, and offers training
          courses and consulting activities. It works with 76 publishing imprints to create and distribute new books as
          accessible publications, and it’s part of an international network of organisations dealing with content
          accessibility.</p>
        <p>KB - The National Library of the Netherlands has a long history in library research. It promotes the
          visibility, usability, and longevity of the Dutch Library Collection, which is defined as the collective
          holdings of all publicly funded libraries in the Netherlands. It has three main roles: it is the national
          depot where many Dutch publishers send their ebooks, it operates an ebook lending platform for all Dutch
          public libraries, and it commissions the conversion of non-accessible books to accessible formats for people
          with a print impairment. With the EAA on the horizon, the KB strives to make all its public services
          accessible.</p>
        <p>Both EDRLab and LIA are members of the W3C Publishing Business Group, W3C Publishing Working Group, and W3C
          EPUB Community Group. They are active members of the EPUB Community Group Accessibility Task Force and the
          EPUB Community Group Fixed Layout Accessibility Task Force and actively shape standards and guidelines.</p>
      </section>
    </section>
  </section>
  <section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document" epub:type="footnotes">
    <hr />
    <ol>
      <li id="fn1">
        <p>
          <a href="https://worldblindunion.org/programs/accessibility/accessibility-go-a-guide-to-action/">
            <u>https://worldblindunion.org/programs/accessibility/accessibility-go-a-guide-to-action/</u>
          </a>
          <a href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a>
        </p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn2">
        <p>
          <a
            href="https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/summary/strategy-for-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities.html">
            <u>https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/summary/strategy-for-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities.html</u>
          </a>
          <a href="#fnref2" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a>
        </p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn3">
        <p>
          <a href="https://www.ohchr.org/en/instruments-mechanisms/instruments/convention-rights-persons-disabilities">
            <u>https://www.ohchr.org/en/instruments-mechanisms/instruments/convention-rights-persons-disabilities</u>
          </a>
          <a href="#fnref3" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a>
        </p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn4">
        <p>
          <a href="http://edrlab.org">
            <u>edrlab.org</u>
          </a>
          <a href="#fnref4" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a>
        </p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn5">
        <p>
          <a href="http://fondazionelia.org">
            <u>fondazionelia.org</u>
          </a>
          <a href="#fnref5" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a>
        </p>
      </li>
      <li id="fn6">
        <p>
          <a href="http://kb.nl">
            <u>kb.nl</u>
          </a>
          <a href="#fnref6" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a>
        </p>
      </li>
    </ol>
  </section>
</body>

</html>