<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"
  xml:lang="en-gb"
  lang="en-gb">
  <head>
    <meta
      charset="utf-8" />

    <title>Overview</title>
       <link
      rel="stylesheet"
      type="text/css"
      href="../styles/blitz_abelab.css" />
  </head>
  <body
    epub:type="bodymatter">
    <section
      id="overview"
      class="level1"
      >

      <p>
        <span
          epub:type="pagebreak"
          role="doc-pagebreak"
          id="page4"
          aria-label="4"></span>
      </p>
      <h1>Overview</h1>
      <p>Accessible Backlist Ebooks Laboratory (ABE Lab) is a Creative Europe funded project operated by three partners: the European Digital Reading Laboratory (EDRLab), the Fondazione Libri Italiani Accessibili (Fondazione LIA) and the National Library of the Netherlands (KB). It aims to provide publishers with reliable information about options and costs for remediation to make ebooks accessible as requested by the European Accessibility Act (EAA).</p>
      <section
        id="context"
        >
        <h2
          >Context</h2>
        <p>To date, persons with reading disabilities - for instance blind, visually impaired or dyslexic people - only have access to 5 to 10% of the yearly book production, depending on the country they live in: the term “book famine” has been coined some years ago to describe this fact. The books they have access to are specific adaptations of print, created in small quantities by associations for the blind or similar organisations, or digital books</p>
        <p>The European Accessibility Act (Directive (EU) 2019/882, acronym EAA)<a
            href="#fn1"
            class="footnote-ref"
            id="fnref1"
            epub:type="noteref"
            role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a> will come into force in June 2025. This Directive promotes universal accessibility, which consists in taking into account all the needs and possibilities from the conception of the services, to be able to create quality services in this digital context. It is part of the Strategy for the rights of persons with disabilities 2021-2030, which addresses several major themes: accessibility, equality, education, social protection, employment and more. With it, Europe is committed to an inclusive policy that makes people with disabilities a core concern.</p>
        <p>The publishing industry, worldwide, agrees that EPUB is the only digital book format which allows, with a few efforts, the creation of fully accessible ebooks. Most titles are already published in EPUB, and the first born accessible titles are now on sale.</p>
        <p>There will still be an issue with most ebooks published before 2025. Since the objective of the Directive is to end the “book famine” endured by visually impaired people, it is necessary to transform as many titles as possible into accessible EPUB files. To do so, publishers need to have a clear view on gaps to be filled and related costs per type of ebook.</p>
        <p>Remediating these ebooks can generate high costs, due to the lack of appropriate tools, the level of complexity of the different categories of books or the difficulties in converting them related to the fact that they were created when the standards and the formats did not include accessibility features. In that case there will be a high risk that in many situations publishers may remove those titles from the market, resulting in a great loss of diversity, affecting especially niche and rare titles.</p>
        <p>To prevent hundreds of thousands of ebooks from disappearing from the market because of the accessibility requirements, but also to make sure that as many as possible ebooks get an accessible life, stakeholders need an independent analysis and low-cost remediation methodologies and tools.</p>
      </section>
      <section
        id="objectives"
        >
        <p>
          <span
            epub:type="pagebreak"
            role="doc-pagebreak"
            id="page5"
            aria-label="5"></span>
        </p>
        <h2
          >Objectives </h2>
        <p>The main objective of the ABE Lab project is to provide guidelines to European publishers for boosting the remediation of their ebooks currently on sale and convert them into accessible versions. All information about the project can be found on the <a
            href="http://abelab.eu"><u><u>ABE Lab website</u></u></a>.</p>
        <p>This document has two objectives The first is to provide stakeholders with insight into an overview of the number of ebooks actually on the European market and their repartition by categories, formats and years of production. This is addressed in the first main section <i>“Composition of the EU ebook backlist”</i>. The second objective is to provide a view of the gaps to be filled for the titles in the backlist to reach conformity to the EAA. It is covered by the second main section <i>“Gap analysis”.</i></p>
      </section>
    </section>
    <section
      id="footnotes"
      class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
      epub:type="footnotes">
      <hr />
      <ol>
        <li
          id="fn1">
          <p>See online at <a
              href="https://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=1202"><u>https://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=1202</u></a><a
              href="#fnref1"
              class="footnote-back"
              role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p>
        </li>
      </ol>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>