<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"
  xml:lang="en-gb"
  lang="en-gb">
  <head>
    <meta
      charset="utf-8" />
    <meta
      name="generatedBy"
      content="DAISY WordToEPUB 1.0.10 with Pandoc 2.19" />
    <title>Outcomes: methods and guidelines</title>
    <style>
    code{white-space: pre-wrap;}
    span.smallcaps{font-variant: small-caps;}
    div.columns{display: flex; gap: min(4vw, 1.5em);}
    div.column{flex: 1;}
    div.hanging-indent{margin-left: 1.5em; text-indent: -1.5em;}
    ul.task-list{list-style: none;}
    ul.task-list li input[type="checkbox"] {
      width: 0.8em;
      margin: 0 0.8em 0.2em -1.6em;
      vertical-align: middle;
    }
  </style>
    <link
      rel="stylesheet"
      type="text/css"
      href="../styles/wordtoepub.css" />
  </head>
  <body
    epub:type="bodymatter">
    <section
      id="outcomes-methods-and-guidelines"
      class="level1"
      data-number="5">
      <p>
        <span
          epub:type="pagebreak"
          role="doc-pagebreak"
          id="page18"
          aria-label="Page 18. "></span>
      </p>
      <h1
        data-number="5">Outcomes: methods and guidelines</h1>
      <section
        id="recurrent-accessibility-issues"
        class="level2"
        data-number="5.1">
        <h2
          data-number="5.1">Recurrent accessibility issues </h2>
        <p>The gap analysis allowed us to establish a list of the most recurrent accessibility issues found in the backlist ebooks, based on the collected samples<a
            href="#fn1"
            class="footnote-ref"
            id="fnref1"
            epub:type="noteref"
            role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a>. This list has been used for other activities and can be considered a baseline for remediation needs that will apply to most collections. The list is detailed in the <i>Gap analysis</i> section of the <i>Report on backlist data and gap analysis</i>. As a quick reminder, we are just providing here a resume:</p>
        <ul>
          <li>
            <p>Missing Accessibility Metadata</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Non-reflowable content</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Missing or bad textual alternative for graphical resources</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Missing or bad Language Tags</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Structure errors (Empty-Table-Header, Empty-Heading, Heading-Order)</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Missing semantics (Html-Has-Lang, Aria-Roles, Link-Name, Document-Title, Epub-Type-Has-Matching-Role)</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Possible navigation improvements (Landmark-Unique, Epub-Toc-Order, Epub-Pagelist-Broken)</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Contents and styling errors (Link-In-Text-Block, Color-Contrast)</p>
          </li>
        </ul>
        <p>Additionally, there are also accessibility issues that can’t be detected automatically and that requires ad hoc human testing to be identified. This concerns <i>reflowable restrictions</i> imposed by style rules applied to the file, as well as s<i>pecific contents</i> such as forms, scripts, maths, videos and audio, which are not usually used in ebooks, but as this may happen, it will be necessary to include them in the remediation process should they occur in a file.</p>
        <section
          id="test-suite"
          class="level3"
          data-number="5.1.1">
          <h3
            data-number="5.1.1">Test suite</h3>
          <p>To test if the identified remediation tools offer functionalities to fix the identified accessibility issues, we’ve built a set of test files, one for each starting format (EPUB 2, EPUB 3, EPUB Fixed Layout, PDF). We used these test files to carry out functional tests to assess which functionalities were present in a tool and which were missing. In these files, we included all the most recurrent accessibility issues according to our analysis of the publisher's provided ebook backlist.</p>
          <p>The test suite is available from the ABE Lab website <i>Outcomes</i> section<a
              href="#fn2"
              class="footnote-ref"
              id="fnref2"
              epub:type="noteref"
              role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a> and is composed of five files:</p>
          <ol
            type="1">
            <li>
              <p>an EPUB 2 file, to be used to check the features of the remediation tools that claim to turn inaccessible EPUB 2 into accessible EPUB 3;</p>
            </li>
            <li>
              <p>an EPUB 3 file, to be used to check the features of the remediation tools that claim to turn inaccessible EPUB 3 into accessible EPUB 3;</p>
            </li>
            <li>
              <p>an EPUB 3 with multimedia (audio and video) only;</p>
            </li>
            <li>
              <p>an EPUB 3 Fixed Layout, to be used for the remediation workflows from EPUB 3 Fixed Layout to “accessible” EPUB 3 Fixed Layout and from EPUB 3 Fixed Layout to EPUB 3 reflowable;</p>
            </li>
            <li>
              <p>a PDF file to be used to test the tools that convert a PDF file into a PDF/UA file or in an EPUB 3 file.</p>
            </li>
          </ol>
        </section>
      </section>
      <section
        id="mark19for-publishersmark"
        class="level2"
        data-number="5.2">
        <p>
          <span
            epub:type="pagebreak"
            role="doc-pagebreak"
            id="page19"
            aria-label="Page 19. "></span>
        </p>
        <h2
          data-number="5.2">
          <mark>For publishers</mark>
        </h2>
        <p>As there are too few common denominators to classify backlist titles, and because the EAA asks to assess and evaluate disproportionate burden per title, the minimum to do to keep titles in sales is to acquire a good knowledge of the collections.</p>
        <p>This part can be done with support of existing automated evaluation tools and distributors' sales reports. These steps will generate a better understanding of the existing and therefore, reinforce the publishing house at different levels, not only those related to accessibility.</p>
        <section
          id="markhow-to-triage-filesmark"
          class="level3"
          data-number="5.2.1">
          <h3
            data-number="5.2.1">
            <mark>How to triage files?</mark>
          </h3>
          <p>Collecting information and statistics is necessary to start a triage and track decisions per book. At the moment of this report, no known available tool exists to do so. This can be implemented in an integrated information system or, by default, as a spreadsheet. For each title, it is necessary to collect at least the following baseline information:</p>
          <ul>
            <li>
              <p>File format</p>
            </li>
            <li>
              <p>Other formats the title is available in</p>
            </li>
            <li>
              <p>Known production information like</p>
              <ul>
                <li>
                  <p>Year of production</p>
                </li>
                <li>
                  <p>Source file (availability and format)</p>
                </li>
                <li>
                  <p>Service provider, if known</p>
                </li>
              </ul>
            </li>
            <li>
              <p>Known editorial information like</p>
              <ul>
                <li>
                  <p>The presence of languages different from the main language</p>
                </li>
                <li>
                  <p>Images common to all books (cover, logos)</p>
                </li>
                <li>
                  <p>Number of images (except the common ones)</p>
                </li>
              </ul>
            </li>
          </ul>
          <p>Additionally, it is an easy step to collect EPUBCheck and ACE reports. This will allow publishers to add the following columns to the spreadsheet:</p>
          <ul>
            <li>
              <p>Number of EPUBCheck errors (critical, serious and minor)</p>
            </li>
            <li>
              <p>Number of ACE errors (critical, serious and minor)</p>
            </li>
          </ul>
          <p>More statistics and in-depth analysis can be generated following the methodology used by the ABE Lab gap analysis or requiring services from an accessibility consultancy organisation. We also expect that more detailed analysis tools will be available shortly, as proposed by distributors, service providers, or other actors. In the context of ABE Lab, we have calculated three additional statistics sets:</p>
          <ul>
            <li>
              <p>statistics on the usage of HTML tags, attributes and values</p>
              <ul>
                <li>
                  <p>Number of times each tag and attribute appears in the file</p>
                </li>
                <li>
                  <p>Attribute values and how many times a certain value appears for a certain attribute (e.g. lang, class, role)</p>
                </li>
              </ul>
            </li>
            <li>
              <p>a check whether the language attribute given by the content creator is congruent with the text or not. We analysed the text of all paragraphs with more than 5 words using a model trained with Machine Learning techniques, which can guess language from plain text<a
                  href="#fn3"
                  class="footnote-ref"
                  id="fnref3"
                  epub:type="noteref"
                  role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a>;</p>
            </li>
            <li>
              <p>number of words per XHTML file.</p>
            </li>
          </ul>
        </section>
        <section
          id="mark20how-to-evaluate-costmark"
          class="level3"
          data-number="5.2.2">
          <p>
            <span
              epub:type="pagebreak"
              role="doc-pagebreak"
              id="page20"
              aria-label="Page 20. "></span>
          </p>
          <h3
            data-number="5.2.2">
            <mark>How to evaluate cost?</mark>
          </h3>
          <p>The monetary costs of remediation of various ebooks vary strongly from one country to another. Therefore, it is not possible to provide an estimate in terms of prices and costs. Instead, we share the time frame that, based on our experimentation, requires correcting each type of accessibility error.</p>
          <p>Remembering that one-off costs may apply to the organisation is also important. These may include awareness, initial planning, workflow set and tools selection, as well as training people and tools. Since most publishers will first focus on modifying their workflows or specifications for their contracted service providers to make their new ebooks accessible, the associated organisational costs, such as awareness and training, will likely be incurred before the remediation process for backlist titles begins. Certain additional information will be necessary to decide which backlist titles will be remediated, which titles may be kept under disproportionate burden, and which may be removed from the market. This may include legal information, cost estimates for different remediation options and information about the revenues to be expected. Insights on what it takes to remediate existing titles will be the most difficult to get, and for this, some consultancy might be required.</p>
          <p>Defining the production cost associated with the backlist ebook remediation activity requires taking into account which interventions can be carried out automatically by the available remediation tools, which adjustments require the intervention of a human operator expert on accessibility, what the post-remediation quality control efforts are, and if there are additional costs related to reintroducing the title in the market. The next subsections give some insights to help with the evaluation of production costs.</p>
          <section
            id="primary-considerations"
            class="level4"
            data-number="5.2.2.1">
            <h4
              data-number="5.2.2.1">Primary considerations</h4>
            <p>There is currently no remediation technological solution or service on the market that can process a large collection of files in one go, but using the <i>Readium Go Toolkit</i>, it is possible to parse EPUB files and add some basic accessibility metadata that can be inferred from the ebook file to large collections (e.g. it can tell if the ebook contains a table of contents, mathematical formulas in MathML or images, but not if the associated alt text is meaningful, and it cannot check whether the language attribute given by the content creator is congruent with the actual language text).</p>
            <p>There are tools for reflowable EPUBs that achieve a good level of remediation at an affordable cost. But if the digital version of a publication has been produced as a fixed-layout EPUB or PDF, based on the results of our project, the most achievable option is not to remediate the Fixed Layout or PDF file but to produce a newborn accessible version of the title as a reflowable EPUB.</p>
            <p>Graphical resources need dedicated treatment as they require an editorial decision (is it necessary to add an alternative text?) and action (writing an accurate alternative text). ACE report can provide a list of images to help with this process.</p>
          </section>
          <section
            id="time-for-basic-remediation-of-epub2-to-epub3"
            class="level4"
            data-number="5.2.2.2">
            <h4
              data-number="5.2.2.2">Time for basic remediation of EPUB2 to EPUB3</h4>
            <p>Based on our testing activities, we estimate that with the currently available tools, 1 hour for an average EPUB 2 to be transformed to EPUB 3, and then remediated to meet the accessibility requirements of the EAAis a reasonable time. Further enrichments (like adding page breaks and page numbers) are not included in this evaluation.</p>
            <p>The following list gives more details including minimum, maximum and average times spent by the operator who performed the remediation tests:</p>
            <ul>
              <li>
                <p>for the ‘simple’ fiction title (320 pages, 14 images), the total time was 43 minutes minimum, 52 minutes on average, and 67 minutes maximum</p>
              </li>
              <li>
                <p>
                  <span
                    epub:type="pagebreak"
                    role="doc-pagebreak"
                    id="page21"
                    aria-label="Page 21. "></span>for a children’s book with mainly text, only a cover image (288 pages, 19 images) the total time was 39 minutes minimum, 43 minutes on average and 48 minutes maximum</p>
              </li>
              <li>
                <p>for a title with ‘medium complexity’ (category Society and Social Sciences) (277 pages, 60 images, 20 tables, 150 links, 192 footnotes, 46 chapters) the total time was 55 minutes minimum, 64 minutes on average and 73 minutes maximum. Note that time refers to time needed to copy-paste a generic image descriptions, not the time required for writing them.</p>
              </li>
            </ul>
          </section>
          <section
            id="time-for-conversion-and-remediation-of-pdf-to-reflowable-epub3"
            class="level4"
            data-number="5.2.2.3">
            <h4
              data-number="5.2.2.3">Time for conversion and remediation of PDF to reflowable EPUB3</h4>
            <p>Based on our testing activities, we estimate that converting a PDF into an EPUB 3, and remediating the output file will take more time than converting an EPUB 2 into an EPUB 3 and making it accessible (based on the results of the ‘average’ files tested). Typically a day per file would be plausible. Actual time per real book needs to be assessed case by case.</p>
            <p>The following list gives more details including minimum, maximum and average times spent by the operator who performed the remediation:</p>
            <ul>
              <li>
                <p>a sample with ‘medium complexity’ (Category Law) including 83 pages, 1 image, 55 links (hyperlinks and footnotes) took 54 minutes minimum, 86 minutes on average and 118 minutes maximum. The full book is 492 pages including the cover, 1 image, 57 links, and around 770 footnotes, an EPUB would be around 24 chapters);</p>
              </li>
              <li>
                <p>An extract of category Medical (22 pages, 13 images, 1 table and 4 links) took 63 minutes minimum, 72 minutes average and 81 minutes maximum. The full book is 359 pages including the cover, 164 images, 21 tables, and 104 links (not counting TOC and index);</p>
              </li>
              <li>
                <p>an illustrated children's book (57 pages, 37 images) took a minimum of 22 minutes, an average of 25 and a maximum of 28;</p>
              </li>
              <li>
                <p>another non-fiction extract, including 40 pages, 15 images, 31 links (hyperlinks and footnotes) took a minimum of 34, an average of 44 and a maximum of 55 minutes. The full book is 136 pages, 75 images, 146 links, and 28 footnotes).</p>
              </li>
            </ul>
          </section>
        </section>
        <section
          id="markwhen-to-start-remediationmark"
          class="level3"
          data-number="5.2.3">
          <h3
            data-number="5.2.3">
            <mark>When to start remediation?</mark>
          </h3>
          <p>Of the accessibility correction actions, the addition of accessibility metadata is the one that can be accomplished most quickly. This can be partially done by a batch use of the <i>Readium Go Toolkit</i> (an open-source tool that can derive some basic and partial accessibility metadata directly from files), by an in-house build script reusing the inference rules proposed by the Readium Foundation, or by publisher-specific inference rules created from the knowledge of the collections. The result will be the addition of accessibility information to ONIX records. We expect that some distributors will propose prefilled formulas or Excel files depending on the usual interexchange procedures in place. However, in most countries, publishers remain legally accountable for the information provided, so understanding the meaning of the most important accessibility information is necessary. This learning can be achieved by reading the resources proposed in the dedicated appendix.</p>
        </section>
      </section>
      <section
        id="mark22for-tool-producersmark"
        class="level2"
        data-number="5.3">
        <p>
          <span
            epub:type="pagebreak"
            role="doc-pagebreak"
            id="page22"
            aria-label="Page 22. "></span>
        </p>
        <h2
          data-number="5.3">
          <mark>For tool producers</mark>
        </h2>
        <p>Based on the recurrent accessibility issues found in the sample collections, and built on the results of our testing activities, we have detailed high-level guidelines including the main functionalities and information that tool producers should provide to help publishers solve efficiently accessibility problems found in their files. Tools producers should refer to the <i>Guidelines</i><a
            href="#fn4"
            class="footnote-ref"
            id="fnref4"
            epub:type="noteref"
            role="doc-noteref"><sup>4</sup></a>. We are providing here a quick summary of key points.</p>
        <p>
          <i>Find</i>, <i>fix</i>, and <i>check</i> are the three key aspects of accessibility remediation. Tools are expected to support expert human operators by identifying the accessibility problem, reporting it to them, and guiding them for applying corrections. For the remediation to be effective, the tools should therefore:</p>
        <ul>
          <li>
            <p>find the accessibility issues contained in the ebook;</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>provide a way to correct the identified accessibility issues, for example, via dedicated options;</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>check the conformance of the file to ensure the output will be valid with the file format specification and compliant with the target accessibility guidelines or standards. Accessibility checks carried out before export, or at the operator's request, are also strategically important to ensure that the ebook does not have accessibility problems before it is exported and checked with external tools.</p>
          </li>
        </ul>
        <p>Publishers' needs vary greatly, depending on the size of the collections, in-house knowledge, and many other factors. Therefore, the remediation tools that will be used can take many different forms and levels of complexity. It is important to identify which operator audience the individual tool is aimed at by providing clear, detailed documentation on how the remediation tool works and what it offers to make the work easier and faster. Minimum viable information that must be found is as follows:</p>
        <ul>
          <li>
            <p>Input and output formats</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Accepted contents complexity</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Accessibility Target (EPUB Accessibility, WCAG, EAA, ADA, PDF/UA)</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Type of licence and plan</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Safety of the data</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Machine Learning policy</p>
          </li>
        </ul>
        <p>Although the objective of the ABE Lab project is not to guide the design, usability, and accessibility of graphical interfaces of remediation tools, it would be great if these were compliant with the requirements defined by the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2, the User Agent Accessibility Guidelines (UAAG), and the technical standard EN 301 549. An accessible interface would represent added value and make the remediation tool usable by many operators. The following key points should be regarded with caution:</p>
        <ul>
          <li>
            <p>In-tool support. There should be attention to providing as much support as possible to guide the human operators in fixing the accessibility errors, to reduce the number of iterations needed to the minimum;</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Improve, don't disrupt. The remediation tool must not cause a loss of information, must not add accessibility errors and must not compromise the technical integrity of the file. When converting a PDF into an accessible PDF, the original layout and design should be maintained: fonts, colours, and graphic elements should not be affected during the remediation phase, and the accessible file respects the graphics of the source file.</p>
          </li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          <span
            epub:type="pagebreak"
            role="doc-pagebreak"
            id="page23"
            aria-label="Page 23. "></span>An ebook can contain many different types of accessibility errors. Analysing a sample of backlist files, we found that some accessibility problems recur with particular frequency; these are detailed in the Gap analysis<a
            href="#fn5"
            class="footnote-ref"
            id="fnref5"
            epub:type="noteref"
            role="doc-noteref"><sup>5</sup></a> and resumed here:</p>
        <ul>
          <li>
            <p>Accessibility metadata</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Alternative text for images</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Missing or bad language tag</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Headings hierarchy</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Colour contrast</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Document title</p>
          </li>
          <li>
            <p>Semantics</p>
          </li>
        </ul>
        <section
          id="markcheck-your-tool-functionalitiesmark"
          class="level3"
          data-number="5.3.1">
          <h3
            data-number="5.3.1">
            <mark>Check your tool functionalities</mark>
          </h3>
          <p>Evaluating a tool is a complex activity and involves multifaceted aspects. One of these is represented by the expectations of those who evaluate the instrument, which largely depends on their specific needs. A tool could be evaluated based on the results it allows to obtain even when used by non-expert users. At the same time, what is sought may be a tool capable of integrating effectively and fluidly into existing workflows and which therefore potentially requires advanced coding and programming skills. The ideal solution may also be platforms or programs that allow making batch modifications to large quantities of files. Combining such broad and varied expectations would make a complex checklist. Hence, the checklist we prepared focuses on the features related to the most recurring accessibility issues highlighted by the gap analysis.</p>
          <p>The checklists reported in part 4 of the <i>Guidelines</i><a
              href="#fn6"
              class="footnote-ref"
              id="fnref6"
              epub:type="noteref"
              role="doc-noteref"><sup>6</sup></a> can be used as methodological support that allows one to obtain a clearer view of the current state of a tool. They are provided to help stakeholders, remediation tools producers and developers check the state of the art of their tools and to plan future developments.</p>
          <p>However, they do not claim to be a complete and definitive list to assess the quality or completeness of a remediation tool, nor does meeting all the points in the list guarantee that the remediated files will be fully accessible and compliant with the requirements of the EAA and international accessibility guidelines.</p>
          <p>It’s also important to highlight that these guidelines might not be maintained after the end of the project. Therefore, they can not be used to claim conformity with the latest level of required accessibility and must not be used as a marketing or commercial argument.</p>
          <p>The points of the checklists and the content of the guidelines are high-level indications that can be relevant for remediation tools regardless of the input file format.</p>
        </section>
      </section>
    </section>
    <section
      id="footnotes"
      class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
      epub:type="footnotes">
      <hr />
      <ol>
        <li
          id="fn1">
          <p>For a complete and detailed list of the most recurrent accessibility issues detected, see <i>Recurrent accessibility issues detected</i>, in “Gap analysis”, ABE Lab, <a
              href="https://www.abelab.eu/outcomes/gap_analysis/#recurrent-accessibility-issues-detected"><u>https://www.abelab.eu/outcomes/gap_analysis/#recurrent-accessibility-issues-detected</u></a><a
              href="#fnref1"
              class="footnote-back"
              role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p>
        </li>
        <li
          id="fn2">
          <p>
            <a
              href="https://www.abelab.eu/outcomes/test-suite">
              <u>https://www.abelab.eu/outcomes/test-suite</u>
            </a>
            <a
              href="#fnref2"
              class="footnote-back"
              role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a>
          </p>
        </li>
        <li
          id="fn3">
          <p>Wrong language assertion is done with the help of the <a
              href="https://github.com/CLD2Owners/cld2"><u>Compact Language Detect 2 (CLD2)</u></a>. We compare the output of CLD2 with language tags specified at the tag level and file level.<a
              href="#fnref3"
              class="footnote-back"
              role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p>
        </li>
        <li
          id="fn4">
          <p>
            <i>Guidelines for remediation tools producers</i>, Released on 2024, April the 25th. Diffusion: Public. Available as HTML, EPUB and PDF at <a
              href="https://github.com/ABELaboratory/publications/deliverables/guidelines-remediation-tools-producers"><u>https://abelab.eu/outcomes/deliverables/guidelines-remediation-tools-producers</u></a><a
              href="#fnref4"
              class="footnote-back"
              role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p>
        </li>
        <li
          id="fn5">
          <p>For a complete and detailed list of the most recurrent accessibility issues detected, see <i>Recurrent accessibility issues detected</i>, in “Gap analysis”, ABE Lab, <a
              href="https://www.abelab.eu/outcomes/gap_analysis/#recurrent-accessibility-issues-detected"><u>https://www.abelab.eu/outcomes/gap_analysis/#recurrent-accessibility-issues-detected</u></a><a
              href="#fnref5"
              class="footnote-back"
              role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p>
        </li>
        <li
          id="fn6">
          <p>
            <i>Guidelines for remediation tools producers</i>, Released on 2024, April the 25th. Diffusion: Public. Available as HTML, EPUB and PDF at <a
              href="https://github.com/ABELaboratory/publications/deliverables/guidelines-remediation-tools-producers"><u>https://github.com/ABELaboratory/publications/deliverables/guidelines-remediation-tools-producers</u></a><a
              href="#fnref6"
              class="footnote-back"
              role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p>
        </li>
      </ol>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>