<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en-gb" lang="en-gb">
<head>
    <meta charset="utf-8"/>
    
    <title>Part 1 - The context</title>

    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/blitz_abelab.css"/>
  </head>

  <body epub:type="bodymatter">
    <section id="part-1---the-context" class="level1" role="doc-chapter">
      <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page6" aria-label="6">
      </span>
      <h1>Part 1 - The context</h1>

      <section id="accessibility-matters" class="level2">
        <h2 id="sigil_toc_id_1">Accessibility matters</h2>
        <p>
          <strong>
            Accessibility
          </strong> means that tools, technologies, websites, ebooks and digital documents are designed and developed so that everyone, regardless of their disabilities - physical, cognitive, motor, permanent or temporary, situational or age-related - can use them. Accessibility is fundamental to providing equal access to information, study, entertainment, and equal opportunities also to people with disabilities.</p>
        <p>In addition to being required by the regulatory frameworks in force in many countries around the world, accessibility is a social value and a basic human right recognized by the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UN CRPD).</p>
        <p>Accessibility is also good for business: an accessible tool, website or ebook is a product of high quality that improves the general user experience and satisfaction<a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a>.</p>
      </section>
      <section id="be-prepared-for-june-2025-the-european-accessibility-act-is-approaching" class="level2">
        <h2 id="sigil_toc_id_2">Be prepared for June 2025: the European Accessibility Act is approaching</h2>
        <p>The European Accessibility Act is an EU Directive (2019/882)<a href="#fn2" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a> that aims to improve the functioning of the internal market for accessible products and services, by removing barriers created by divergent rules in Member States. It will enter into force in June 2025. The Directive establishes binding accessibility targets that must be met by many different products and services to strengthen the rights of people with disabilities to access goods and services, including ebooks. Since ebooks are considered a service, the concept of a service provider now includes publishers and all the other economic operators involved in their distribution. Every step of the publishing chain must integrate accessibility to create an accessible digital publishing ecosystem.</p>
        <p>For publishers, this means that they are required to produce their digital publications in an accessible format, according to the <strong>born accessible paradigm</strong>.</p>
        <p>The white paper “E-books for all - Towards an accessible digital ecosystem” by Fondazione LIA<a href="#fn3" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref3" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a> provides detailed information on the impact of the EAA on the publishing supply chain.</p>
        <p>The European ebook market, however, is not only made up of new titles, which can be placed on the market already accessible, but also of ebooks that have been published in previous years, and which publishers will have to make accessible if they want to keep them on the European market.</p>
      </section>
      <section id="the-abe-lab-project" class="level2">
        <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page7" aria-label="7">
        </span>
        <h2 id="sigil_toc_id_3">The ABE Lab project</h2>
        <section id="the-partners" class="level3">
          <h3 id="sigil_toc_id_4">The partners</h3>
          <p>The <strong>ABE Lab - Accessible Backlist Ebooks Laboratory</strong> is a European Cooperation project funded by Creative Europe. The project is coordinated by the <em>European Digital Reading Lab (EDRLab)</em>; <em>Fondazione LIA</em> and the <em>National Library of the Netherlands</em> (<span xml:lang="nl-NL" lang="nl-NL">Koninklijke Bibliotheek</span> - KB) are partners.</p>
          <p>
            <strong>
              EDRLab
            </strong> is a non-profit transnational laboratory that develops open standards and open-source tools, to accelerate the diffusion of digital technologies in the publishing industry. It is an association of more than 70 members from the publishing industry, including publishers, providers of publishing services, distributors, tools developers and accessibility specialists. It is also the developer of the Thorium Reader application, a free and highly accessible reading application for EPUB 3 ebooks<a href="#fn4" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref4" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>4</sup></a>.</p>
          <p>
            <strong>
              Fondazione LIA
            </strong> is an Italian non-profit organisation and an internationally recognized expert in the certification of accessibility of EPUB 3 ebooks, having already certified more than 30.000 ebooks available in the <em><span xml:lang="it-IT" lang="it-IT">libri italiani accessibili</span></em> catalogue<a href="#fn5" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref5" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>5</sup></a>. Fondazione LIA carries out research and development activities in the field of digital accessibility, organises awareness-raising events, offers training courses and consulting activities. It works with 76 publishing imprints to create and distribute the new ebooks as <em>born accessible publications</em> and it’s part of an international network of organisations dealing with accessibility of contents<a href="#fn6" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref6" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>6</sup></a>.</p>
          <p>
            <strong>
              KB - The National Library of the Netherlands
            </strong> has a long history in library research and promotes the visibility, usability and longevity of the Dutch Library Collection, defined as the collective holdings of all publicly funded libraries in the Netherlands. It has three main roles: it is the national depot where many Dutch publishers send their ebooks, it operates an ebook lending platform for all Dutch public libraries and it commissions the conversion of non-accessible (e)books to accessible formats for people with a print impairment. With the EAA on the horizon, the KB strives to get all of its public services accessible<a href="#fn7" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref7" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>7</sup></a>.</p>
          <p>Both EDRLab and LIA are part of the W3C Publishing Business Group, W3C Publishing Working Group, W3C EPUB Community Group, and are active members of the EPUB Community Group Accessibility Task Force and of the EPUB Community Group Fixed Layout Accessibility Task Force.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="objectives-and-outcomes-of-the-project" class="level3">
          <h3 id="sigil_toc_id_5">Objectives and outcomes of the project</h3>
          <p>ABE Lab has two main objectives:</p>
          <ol type="1">
            <li>
              to collect and analyse in detail the composition of the European ebook backlist</li>
              <li>to provide guidelines to European publishers to boost the remediation of the ebooks from their backlist.</li>
          </ol>
          <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page8" aria-label="8">
          </span>
          <p>Without precise data about the composition of the ebook backlist in Europe, it is not possible to evaluate the best workflows and estimate the time and expertise that making these ebooks accessible would require. The first part of the project was therefore focused on the collection and analysis of data to define the size and composition of the European ebook backlist - defined as the collection of all ebooks available on the EU market - and on identifying the most recurrent accessibility issues that can be found in these ebooks. The results are detailed in the public deliverable <em>Report on Backlist Data and gap analysis</em>, freely downloadable from the official ABE Lab website both in PDF and EPUB format. An online version is also available<a href="#fn8" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref8" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>8</sup></a>.</p>
          <p>The core part of the project has been to analyse and test the processes and workflows by which ebooks of different types and formats can be transformed into accessible EPUB files or accessible PDF files. This implies knowing which remediation tools are available on the market and what they can do, for which formats and types of books (fiction, complex layouts, STEM) they are most effective and which are their shortcomings.</p>
          <p>It will in fact be essential to have tools that are able to correct the accessibility errors identified in the backlist files, or that can offer the human operators options and features to support them in their ebook remediation journey.</p>
          <p>Consequently, testing the remediation tools has represented a fundamental part of ABE Lab. The results of the tests carried out in the context of the project form the basis of these guidelines.</p>
          <p>All public future deliverables of the project will be available, after publication, on the <em>Deliverables</em> page<a href="#fn9" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref9" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>9</sup></a> of the ABE Lab website.</p>
        </section>
      </section>
      <section id="objectives-of-the-guidelines" class="level2">
        <h2 id="sigil_toc_id_6">Objectives of the guidelines</h2>
        <p>To the best of our knowledge, this white paper represents the first publicly-available work of its kind. The document outlines high-level guidelines that stakeholders, producers and developers of technological tools and solutions aimed at fixing the accessibility issues of digital documents and publications can use to independently evaluate their tools. It can also be a useful resource to improve them through the integration of new features, or to design new ones that offer the functionalities and support necessary to produce fully accessible ebooks starting from inaccessible versions. Remediation tools should provide all the possible support for the human operators responsible for the file correction activity, making the process as simple, intuitive and fluid as possible. This, of course, will depend also on the competences of the target users and on the type of tool used - remediation tools can be desktop applications, cloud platforms, API, SDK and more.</p>
        <p>The information these guidelines provide are based on the accessibility requirements for ebooks defined by the European Accessibility Act listed in Annex I sections III and IV Linea f). EPUB (Electronic  <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page9" aria-label="9">
        </span> PUBlications)<a href="#fn10" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref10" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>10</sup></a> is recognized as the format of choice to respond to those requirements, as detailed by the <em>EPUB Accessibility - EU Accessibility Act Mapping</em><a href="#fn11" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref11" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>11</sup></a>. Therefore, the EPUB Accessibility represents the target for the remediation of ebooks in EPUB format, since EPUB files conforming to EPUB Accessibility guidelines are responding to the European Accessibility Act requirements. The EPUB Accessibility guidelines are built on the <em>Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2</em>(WCAG 2)<a href="#fn12" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref12" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>12</sup></a>, which they include and expand with specific requirements for digital publications.</p>
        <p>Ebooks, however, are not exclusively produced in EPUB format. Other formats coexist, most of them derived from this main format or based on the same web technologies (HTML, JavaScript, CSS)
       
          <a href="#fn13" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref13" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref"><sup>13</sup></a>. 
        </p>
        <p>
          A notable exception to this is the Portable Document Format (PDF), a format initially proposed for print reliability and digital conservation of documents. Accessibility of PDF is based on WCAG 2 and is made possible thanks to an additional semantic descriptive layer composed of 28 elements expressed as XML language tags. The PDF/UA ISO
          <a href="#fn14" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref14" epub:type="noteref" role="doc-noteref">
            <sup>14</sup>
          </a>
          standard provides definitive terms and requirements for accessibility in PDF documents and applications.
         
        </p>
        <p>
         Pre-paginated ebooks (like PDFs and Fixed Layout EPUBs) do not comply with the EAA requirements for the criterion of flexibility and choice in the presentation of the content, a key functionality for persons facing cognitive difficulties (like dyslexia) or with sight impairments. Hence, to make the content of a PDF fully accessible, a change of format might be necessary, from a fixed layout one to a reflowable one.
        </p>
      </section>

      <section id="a-rapidly-evolving-landscape" class="level2">
        <h2 id="sigil_toc_id_7">A rapidly evolving landscape</h2>
        <p>Technology providers and developers of technical tools for the publishing industry are increasingly integrating functionalities in their products and IT solutions that can be used to convert existing inaccessible digital files into accessible digital versions, or to enhance their level of accessibility. Some tools already exist on the market with this aim, and we are also aware of several new projects in development. It is therefore easy to predict that more dedicated technological solutions will be made available in the near future.</p>
        <p>This rapidly evolving landscape is also driven by an increasingly widespread use of new types of automation powered by systems based on Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, whose great  <span epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak" id="page10" aria-label="10">
        </span>potential could play a key role in improving and speeding up processes for correcting accessibility issues - in particular, they represent a possible solution to quickly process large amounts of files.</p>
      </section>
      <section id="the-rapid-advance-of-artificial-intelligence" class="level2">
        <h2 id="sigil_toc_id_8">The rapid advance of Artificial Intelligence</h2>
        <p>When we defined the objectives and activities of the ABE Lab project, the topic of Artificial Intelligence was not yet as hot a topic as it would become just a few months later. Artificial Intelligence applied to an ever-increasing number of fields began to be talked about very widely during the course of the project. Therefore, the study of the use of Artificial Intelligence in the context of digital accessibility and in particular its correction - i.e., in remediation tools - was not among the aims of the ABE Lab project.</p>
        <p>Publishers and other actors in the publishing chain have been using automation, including Natural Language Processing and Artificial Intelligence technologies, for several years already. Now facing the revolutions of Large Language Models (LLM) and Generative AI technologies (GAI), they are observing, testing and defining positions towards this technology and its use in editorial workflows. This has led in some cases to express concerns related to the uncertainty about how their contents and files are used by such systems.</p>
        <p>However, it should also be highlighted that, in the current state of the art, Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning systems cannot replace the competence and evaluation ability of a human being. If it is possible, for example, to automatically generate alternative descriptions for images with AI, it has yet to be proved that these alternative descriptions can provide information equivalent to that conveyed by the images themself, or that they are comparable to those produced by a subject expert. Therefore, human decision is still key to stating whether such descriptions are appropriate or not for a given context.</p>
        <p>Developers and technology specialists are aware of the power of AI, but they are also aware of the risks implied in and of the need for a wise and detailed study of side effects, edge cases, caveats and other surprises coming with intents to bypass human driven operations.</p>
      </section>
    </section>
   
 <section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document" epub:type="footnotes">
      <hr/>
      <aside epub:type="footnote" role="doc-footnote" id="fn1">
        <p>
          <a href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">1</a>. <em>Introduction to Web Accessibility,</em> W3C Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI),</p>
        <p>
          <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/fundamentals/accessibility-intro/">https://www.w3.org/WAI/fundamentals/accessibility-intro/</a>
        </p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote" role="doc-footnote" id="fn2">
        <p>
          <a href="#fnref2" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">2</a>. See online at: <a href="https://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=1202">https://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=1202</a></p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote" role="doc-footnote" id="fn3">
        <p>
          <a href="#fnref3" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">3</a>. <em>E-books for all. Towards an accessible publishing ecosystem,</em> Fondazione LIA, 2020. Available online at: <a href="https://www.fondazionelia.org/en/resources/e-books-for-all/">https://www.fondazionelia.org/en/resources/e-books-for-all/</a></p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote" role="doc-footnote" id="fn4">
        <p>
          <a href="#fnref4" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">4</a>. More information available on EDRLab’s official website: <a href="https://www.edrlab.org/">https://www.edrlab.org/</a></p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote" role="doc-footnote" id="fn5">
        <p>
          <a href="#fnref5" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">5</a>. <a href="https://catalogo.fondazionelia.org/">https://catalogo.fondazionelia.org/</a></p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote" role="doc-footnote" id="fn6">
        <p>
          <a href="#fnref6" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">6</a>. More information available on Fondazione LIA’s official website: <a href="https://www.fondazionelia.org/">https://www.fondazionelia.org/</a></p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote" role="doc-footnote" id="fn7">
        <p>
          <a href="#fnref7" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">7</a>. More information available on KB’s official website: <a href="https://www.kb.nl/en">https://www.kb.nl/en</a></p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote" role="doc-footnote" id="fn8">
        <p>
          <a href="#fnref8" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">8</a>. Report on Backlist Data and gap analysis, ABE Lab, October 30, 2023. Available online at <a href="https://www.abelab.eu/outcomes/deliverables/#report-on-backlist-data-and-gap-analysis">https://www.abelab.eu/outcomes/deliverables/#report-on-backlist-data-and-gap-analysis</a></p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote" role="doc-footnote" id="fn9">
        <p>
          <a href="#fnref9" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">9</a>. The page can be found at the following link: <a href="https://www.abelab.eu/outcomes/deliverables/">https://www.abelab.eu/outcomes/deliverables/</a></p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote" role="doc-footnote" id="fn10">
        <p>
          <a href="#fnref10" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">10</a>. EPUB® 3 defines a distribution and interchange format for digital publications and documents. The EPUB format provides a means of representing, packaging, and encoding structured and semantically enhanced web content — including HTML, CSS, SVG, and other resources — for distribution in a single-file container.</p>
        <p>The publishing industry, worldwide, agrees that EPUB is the only digital book format which allows, with a few efforts, the creation of fully accessible ebooks. The standard is available online at: <a href="https://www.w3.org/TR/epub-33/">https://www.w3.org/TR/epub-33/</a></p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote" role="doc-footnote" id="fn11">
        <p>
          <a href="#fnref11" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">11</a>. EPUB Accessibility - EU Accessibility Act Mapping, W3C Group Note, 27 December 2023. Available online at: <a href="https://www.w3.org/TR/epub-a11y-eaa-mapping/">https://www.w3.org/TR/epub-a11y-eaa-mapping/</a></p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote" role="doc-footnote" id="fn12">
        <p>
          <a href="#fnref12" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">12</a>. The Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) are the international standard for web accessibility, developed and maintained by the W3C. WCAG 2.2 was published on 05 October 2023. An overview of WCAG 2 is available at: <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/standards-guidelines/wcag/">https://www.w3.org/WAI/standards-guidelines/wcag/</a></p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote" role="doc-footnote" id="fn13">
        <p>
          <a href="#fnref13" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">13</a>. The backlist data analysis showed that some markets have other formats, like HTML books or apps (18% in France and 25% in Spain). Those formats are based on or derived from the same web technologies of the EPUB format, therefore they should comply with the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines too.</p>
      </aside>
      <aside epub:type="footnote" role="doc-footnote" id="fn14">
        <p>
          <a href="#fnref14" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">14</a>. ISO 14289-1:2014, Document management applications - Electronic document file format enhancement for accessibility</p>
      </aside>
    </section>
</body>
</html>